Produced by Suzanne L. Shell, Charles Franks
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Psmith in the City


by P. G. Wodehouse


[Dedication]
to Leslie Havergal Bradshaw


Contents


1. Mr Bickersdyke Walks behind the Bowler's Arm

2. Mike Hears Bad News

3. The New Era Begins

4. First Steps in a Business Career

5. The Other Man

6. Psmith Explains

7. Going into Winter Quarters

8. The Friendly Native

9. The Haunting of Mr Bickersdyke

10. Mr Bickersdyke Addresses His Constituents

11. Misunderstood

12. In a Nutshell

13. Mike is Moved On

14. Mr Waller Appears in a New Light

15. Stirring Times on the Common

16. Further Developments

17. Sunday Supper

18. Psmith Makes a Discovery

19. The Illness of Edward

20. Concerning a Cheque

21. Psmith Makes Inquiries

22. And Takes Steps

23. Mr Bickersdyke Makes a Concession

24. The Spirit of Unrest

25. At the Telephone

26. Breaking the News

27. At Lord's

28. Psmith Arranges His Future

29. And Mike's

30. The Last Sad Farewells


1. Mr Bickersdyke Walks behind the Bowler's Arm


Considering what a prominent figure Mr John Bickersdyke was to be in
Mike Jackson's life, it was only appropriate that he should make a
dramatic entry into it. This he did by walking behind the bowler's arm
when Mike had scored ninety-eight, causing him thereby to be clean
bowled by a long-hop.

It was the last day of the Ilsworth cricket week, and the house team
were struggling hard on a damaged wicket. During the first two matches
of the week all had been well. Warm sunshine, true wickets, tea in the
shade of the trees. But on the Thursday night, as the team champed
their dinner contentedly after defeating the Incogniti by two wickets,
a pattering of rain made itself heard upon the windows. By bedtime it
had settled to a steady downpour. On Friday morning, when the team of
the local regiment arrived in their brake, the sun was shining once
more in a watery, melancholy way, but play was not possible before
lunch. After lunch the bowlers were in their element. The regiment,
winning the toss, put together a hundred and thirty, due principally to
a last wicket stand between two enormous corporals, who swiped at
everything and had luck enough for two whole teams. The house team
followed with seventy-eight, of which Psmith, by his usual golf
methods, claimed thirty. Mike, who had gone in first as the star bat of
the side, had been run out with great promptitude off the first ball of
the innings, which his partner had hit in the immediate neighbourhood
of point. At close of play the regiment had made five without loss.
This, on the Saturday morning, helped by another shower of rain which
made the wicket easier for the moment, they had increased to a hundred
and forty-eight, leaving the house just two hundred to make on a pitch
which looked as if it were made of linseed.

It was during this week that Mike had first made the acquaintance of
Psmith's family. Mr Smith had moved from Shropshire, and taken Ilsworth
Hall in a neighbouring county. This he had done, as far as could be
ascertained, simply because he had a poor opinion of Shropshire
cricket. And just at the moment cricket happened to be the pivot of his
life.

'My father,' Psmith had confided to Mike, meeting him at the station in
the family motor on the Monday, 'is a man of vast but volatile brain.
He has not that calm, dispassionate outlook on life which marks your
true philosopher, such as myself. I--'

'I say,' interrupted Mike, eyeing Psmith's movements with apprehension,
'you aren't going to drive, are you?'

'Who else? As I was saying, I am like some contented spectator of a
Pageant. My pater wants to jump in and stage-manage. He is a man of
hobbies. He never has more than one at a time, and he never has that
long. But while he has it, it's all there. When I left the house this
morning he was all for cricket. But by the time we get to the ground he
may have chucked cricket and taken up the Territorial Army. Don't be
surprised if you find the wicket being dug up into trenches, when we
arrive, and the pro. moving in echelon towards the pavilion. No,' he
added, as the car turned into the drive, and they caught a glimpse of
white flannels and blazers in the distance, and heard the sound of bat
meeting ball, 'cricket seems still to be topping the bill. Come along,
and I'll show you your room. It's next to mine, so that, if brooding on
Life in the still hours of the night, I hit on any great truth, I shall
pop in and discuss it with you.'

While Mike was changing, Psmith sat on his bed, and continued to
discourse.

'I suppose you're going to the 'Varsity?' he said.

'Rather,' said Mike, lacing his boots. 'You are, of course? Cambridge,
I hope. I'm going to King's.'

'Between ourselves,' confided Psmith, 'I'm dashed if I know what's
going to happen to me. I am the thingummy of what's-its-name.'

'You look it,' said Mike, brushing his hair.

'Don't stand there cracking the glass,' said Psmith. 'I tell you I am
practically a human three-shies-a-penny ball. My father is poising me
lightly in his hand, preparatory to flinging me at one of the milky
cocos of Life. Which one he'll aim at I don't know. The least thing
fills him with a whirl of new views as to my future. Last week we were
out shooting together, and he said that the life of the gentleman-farmer
was the most manly and independent on earth, and that he had a good
mind to start me on that. I pointed out that lack of early training
had rendered me unable to distinguish between a threshing-machine and
a mangel-wurzel, so he chucked that. He has now worked round to
Commerce. It seems that a blighter of the name of Bickersdyke is
coming here for the week-end next Saturday. As far as I can say
without searching the Newgate Calendar, the man Bickersdyke's career
seems to have been as follows. He was at school with my pater, went
into the City, raked in a certain amount of doubloons--probably
dishonestly--and is now a sort of Captain of Industry, manager of some
bank or other, and about to stand for Parliament. The result of these
excesses is that my pater's imagination has been fired, and at time of
going to press he wants me to imitate Comrade Bickersdyke. However,
there's plenty of time. That's one comfort. He's certain to change his
mind again. Ready? Then suppose we filter forth into the arena?'

Out on the field Mike was introduced to the man of hobbies. Mr Smith,
senior, was a long, earnest-looking man who might have been Psmith in a
grey wig but for his obvious energy. He was as wholly on the move as
Psmith was wholly statuesque. Where Psmith stood like some dignified
piece of sculpture, musing on deep questions with a glassy eye, his
father would be trying to be in four places at once. When Psmith
presented Mike to him, he shook hands warmly with him and started a
sentence, but broke off in the middle of both performances to dash
wildly in the direction of the pavilion in an endeavour to catch an
impossible catch some thirty yards away. The impetus so gained carried
him on towards Bagley, the Ilsworth Hall ground-man, with whom a moment
later he was carrying on an animated discussion as to whether he had or
had not seen a dandelion on the field that morning. Two minutes
afterwards he had skimmed away again. Mike, as he watched him, began to
appreciate Psmith's reasons for feeling some doubt as to what would be
his future walk in life.

At lunch that day Mike sat next to Mr Smith, and improved his
acquaintance with him; and by the end of the week they were on
excellent terms. Psmith's father had Psmith's gift of getting on well
with people.

On this Saturday, as Mike buckled on his pads, Mr Smith bounded up,
full of advice and encouragement.

'My boy,' he said, 'we rely on you. These others'--he indicated with a
disparaging wave of the hand the rest of the team, who were visible
through the window of the changing-room--'are all very well. Decent
club bats. Good for a few on a billiard-table. But you're our hope on a
wicket like this. I have studied cricket all my life'--till that summer
it is improbable that Mr Smith had ever handled a bat--'and I know a
first-class batsman when I see one. I've seen your brothers play. Pooh,
you're better than any of them. That century of yours against the Green
Jackets was a wonderful innings, wonderful. Now look here, my boy. I
want you to be careful. We've a lot of runs to make, so we mustn't take
any risks. Hit plenty of boundaries, of course, but be careful.
Careful. Dash it, there's a youngster trying to climb up the elm. He'll
break his neck. It's young Giles, my keeper's boy. Hi! Hi, there!'

He scudded out to avert the tragedy, leaving Mike to digest his expert
advice on the art of batting on bad wickets.

Possibly it was the excellence of this advice which induced Mike to
play what was, to date, the best innings of his life. There are moments
when the batsman feels an almost super-human fitness. This came to Mike
now. The sun had begun to shine strongly. It made the wicket more
difficult, but it added a cheerful touch to the scene. Mike felt calm
and masterful. The bowling had no terrors for him. He scored nine off
his first over and seven off his second, half-way through which he lost
his partner. He was to undergo a similar bereavement several times that
afternoon, and at frequent intervals. However simple the bowling might
seem to him, it had enough sting in it to worry the rest of the team
considerably. Batsmen came and went at the other end with such rapidity
that it seemed hardly worth while their troubling to come in at all.
Every now and then one would give promise of better things by lifting
the slow bowler into the pavilion or over the boundary, but it always
happened that a similar stroke, a few balls later, ended in an easy
catch. At five o'clock the Ilsworth score was eighty-one for seven
wickets, last man nought, Mike not out fifty-nine. As most of the house
team, including Mike, were dispersing to their homes or were due for
visits at other houses that night, stumps were to be drawn at six. It
was obvious that they could not hope to win. Number nine on the list,
who was Bagley, the ground-man, went in with instructions to play for a
draw, and minute advice from Mr Smith as to how he was to do it. Mike
had now begun to score rapidly, and it was not to be expected that he
could change his game; but Bagley, a dried-up little man of the type
which bowls for five hours on a hot August day without exhibiting any
symptoms of fatigue, put a much-bound bat stolidly in front of every
ball he received; and the Hall's prospects of saving the game grew
brighter.

At a quarter to six the professional left, caught at very silly point
for eight. The score was a hundred and fifteen, of which Mike had made
eighty-five.

A lengthy young man with yellow hair, who had done some good fast
bowling for the Hall during the week, was the next man in. In previous
matches he had hit furiously at everything, and against the Green
Jackets had knocked up forty in twenty minutes while Mike was putting
the finishing touches to his century. Now, however, with his host's
warning ringing in his ears, he adopted the unspectacular, or Bagley,
style of play. His manner of dealing with the ball was that of one
playing croquet. He patted it gingerly back to the bowler when it was
straight, and left it icily alone when it was off the wicket. Mike,
still in the brilliant vein, clumped a half-volley past point to the
boundary, and with highly scientific late cuts and glides brought his
score to ninety-eight. With Mike's score at this, the total at a
hundred and thirty, and the hands of the clock at five minutes to six,
the yellow-haired croquet exponent fell, as Bagley had fallen, a victim
to silly point, the ball being the last of the over.

Mr Smith, who always went in last for his side, and who so far had not
received a single ball during the week, was down the pavilion steps and
half-way to the wicket before the retiring batsman had taken half a
dozen steps.

'Last over,' said the wicket-keeper to Mike. 'Any idea how many you've
got? You must be near your century, I should think.'

'Ninety-eight,' said Mike. He always counted his runs.

'By Jove, as near as that? This is something like a finish.'

Mike left the first ball alone, and the second. They were too wide of
the off-stump to be hit at safely. Then he felt a thrill as the third
ball left the bowler's hand. It was a long-hop. He faced square to pull
it.

And at that moment Mr John Bickersdyke walked into his life across the
bowling-screen.

He crossed the bowler's arm just before the ball pitched. Mike lost
sight of it for a fraction of a second, and hit wildly. The next moment
his leg stump was askew; and the Hall had lost the match.

'I'm sorry,' he said to Mr Smith. 'Some silly idiot walked across the
screen just as the ball was bowled.'

'What!' shouted Mr Smith. 'Who was the fool who walked behind the
bowler's arm?' he yelled appealingly to Space.

'Here he comes, whoever he is,' said Mike.

A short, stout man in a straw hat and a flannel suit was walking
towards them. As he came nearer Mike saw that he had a hard, thin-lipped
mouth, half-hidden by a rather ragged moustache, and that behind a pair
of gold spectacles were two pale and slightly protruding eyes, which,
like his mouth, looked hard.

'How are you, Smith,' he said.

'Hullo, Bickersdyke.' There was a slight internal struggle, and then Mr
Smith ceased to be the cricketer and became the host. He chatted
amiably to the new-comer.

'You lost the game, I suppose,' said Mr Bickersdyke.

The cricketer in Mr Smith came to the top again, blended now, however,
with the host. He was annoyed, but restrained in his annoyance.

'I say, Bickersdyke, you know, my dear fellow,' he said complainingly,
'you shouldn't have walked across the screen. You put Jackson off, and
made him get bowled.'

'The screen?'

'That curious white object,' said Mike. 'It is not put up merely as an
ornament. There's a sort of rough idea of giving the batsman a chance
of seeing the ball, as well. It's a great help to him when people come
charging across it just as the bowler bowls.'

Mr Bickersdyke turned a slightly deeper shade of purple, and was about
to reply, when what sporting reporters call 'the veritable ovation'
began.

Quite a large crowd had been watching the game, and they expressed
their approval of Mike's performance.

There is only one thing for a batsman to do on these occasions. Mike
ran into the pavilion, leaving Mr Bickersdyke standing.


2. Mike Hears Bad News


It seemed to Mike, when he got home, that there was a touch of gloom in
the air. His sisters were as glad to see him as ever. There was a good
deal of rejoicing going on among the female Jacksons because Joe had
scored his first double century in first-class cricket. Double
centuries are too common, nowadays, for the papers to take much notice
of them; but, still, it is not everybody who can make them, and the
occasion was one to be marked. Mike had read the news in the evening
paper in the train, and had sent his brother a wire from the station,
congratulating him. He had wondered whether he himself would ever
achieve the feat in first-class cricket. He did not see why he should
not. He looked forward through a long vista of years of county cricket.
He had a birth qualification for the county in which Mr Smith had
settled, and he had played for it once already at the beginning of the
holidays. His _debut_ had not been sensational, but it had been
promising. The fact that two members of the team had made centuries,
and a third seventy odd, had rather eclipsed his own twenty-nine not
out; but it had been a faultless innings, and nearly all the papers had
said that here was yet another Jackson, evidently well up to the family
standard, who was bound to do big things in the future.

The touch of gloom was contributed by his brother Bob to a certain
extent, and by his father more noticeably. Bob looked slightly
thoughtful. Mr Jackson seemed thoroughly worried.

Mike approached Bob on the subject in the billiard-room after dinner.
Bob was practising cannons in rather a listless way.

'What's up, Bob?' asked Mike.

Bob laid down his cue.

'I'm hanged if I know,' said Bob. 'Something seems to be. Father's
worried about something.'

'He looked as if he'd got the hump rather at dinner.'

'I only got here this afternoon, about three hours before you did. I
had a bit of a talk with him before dinner. I can't make out what's up.
He seemed awfully keen on my finding something to do now I've come down
from Oxford. Wanted to know whether I couldn't get a tutoring job or a
mastership at some school next term. I said I'd have a shot. I don't
see what all the hurry's about, though. I was hoping he'd give me a bit
of travelling on the Continent somewhere before I started in.'

'Rough luck,' said Mike. 'I wonder why it is. Jolly good about Joe,
wasn't it? Let's have fifty up, shall we?'

Bob's remarks had given Mike no hint of impending disaster. It seemed
strange, of course, that his father, who had always been so easy-going,
should have developed a hustling Get On or Get Out spirit, and be
urging Bob to Do It Now; but it never occurred to him that there could
be any serious reason for it. After all, fellows had to start working
some time or other. Probably his father had merely pointed this out to
Bob, and Bob had made too much of it.

Half-way through the game Mr Jackson entered the room, and stood
watching in silence.

'Want a game, father?' asked Mike.

'No, thanks, Mike. What is it? A hundred up?'

'Fifty.'

'Oh, then you'll be finished in a moment. When you are, I wish you'd
just look into the study for a moment, Mike. I want to have a talk with
you.'

'Rum,' said Mike, as the door closed. 'I wonder what's up?'

For a wonder his conscience was free. It was not as if a bad school-report
might have arrived in his absence. His Sedleigh report had come at
the beginning of the holidays, and had been, on the whole, fairly
decent--nothing startling either way. Mr Downing, perhaps through
remorse at having harried Mike to such an extent during the Sammy
episode, had exercised a studied moderation in his remarks. He had let
Mike down far more easily than he really deserved. So it could not be a
report that was worrying Mr Jackson. And there was nothing else on his
conscience.

Bob made a break of sixteen, and ran out. Mike replaced his cue, and
walked to the study.

His father was sitting at the table. Except for the very important fact
that this time he felt that he could plead Not Guilty on every possible
charge, Mike was struck by the resemblance in the general arrangement
of the scene to that painful ten minutes at the end of the previous
holidays, when his father had announced his intention of taking him
away from Wrykyn and sending him to Sedleigh. The resemblance was
increased by the fact that, as Mike entered, Mr Jackson was kicking at
the waste-paper basket--a thing which with him was an infallible sign
of mental unrest.

'Sit down, Mike,' said Mr Jackson. 'How did you get on during the
week?'

'Topping. Only once out under double figures. And then I was run out.
Got a century against the Green Jackets, seventy-one against the
Incogs, and today I made ninety-eight on a beast of a wicket, and only
got out because some silly goat of a chap--'

He broke off. Mr Jackson did not seem to be attending. There was a
silence. Then Mr Jackson spoke with an obvious effort.

'Look here, Mike, we've always understood one another, haven't we?'

'Of course we have.'

'You know I wouldn't do anything to prevent you having a good time, if
I could help it. I took you away from Wrykyn, I know, but that was a
special case. It was necessary. But I understand perfectly how keen you
are to go to Cambridge, and I wouldn't stand in the way for a minute,
if I could help it.'

Mike looked at him blankly. This could only mean one thing. He was not
to go to the 'Varsity. But why? What had happened? When he had left for
the Smith's cricket week, his name had been down for King's, and the
whole thing settled. What could have happened since then?

'But I can't help it,' continued Mr Jackson.

'Aren't I going up to Cambridge, father?' stammered Mike.

'I'm afraid not, Mike. I'd manage it if I possibly could. I'm just as
anxious to see you get your Blue as you are to get it. But it's kinder
to be quite frank. I can't afford to send you to Cambridge. I won't go
into details which you would not understand; but I've lost a very large
sum of money since I saw you last. So large that we shall have to
economize in every way. I shall let this house and take a much smaller
one. And you and Bob, I'm afraid, will have to start earning your
living. I know it's a terrible disappointment to you, old chap.'

'Oh, that's all right,' said Mike thickly. There seemed to be something
sticking in his throat, preventing him from speaking.

'If there was any possible way--'

'No, it's all right, father, really. I don't mind a bit. It's awfully
rough luck on you losing all that.'

There was another silence. The clock ticked away energetically on the
mantelpiece, as if glad to make itself heard at last. Outside, a
plaintive snuffle made itself heard. John, the bull-dog, Mike's
inseparable companion, who had followed him to the study, was getting
tired of waiting on the mat. Mike got up and opened the door. John
lumbered in.

The movement broke the tension.

'Thanks, Mike,' said Mr Jackson, as Mike started to leave the room,
'you're a sportsman.'


3. The New Era Begins


Details of what were in store for him were given to Mike next morning.
During his absence at Ilsworth a vacancy had been got for him in that
flourishing institution, the New Asiatic Bank; and he was to enter upon
his duties, whatever they might be, on the Tuesday of the following
week. It was short notice, but banks have a habit of swallowing their
victims rather abruptly. Mike remembered the case of Wyatt, who had had
just about the same amount of time in which to get used to the prospect
of Commerce.

On the Monday morning a letter arrived from Psmith. Psmith was still
perturbed. 'Commerce,' he wrote, 'continues to boom. My pater referred
to Comrade Bickersdyke last night as a Merchant Prince. Comrade B. and
I do not get on well together. Purely for his own good, I drew him
aside yesterday and explained to him at great length the frightfulness
of walking across the bowling-screen. He seemed restive, but I was
firm. We parted rather with the Distant Stare than the Friendly Smile.
But I shall persevere. In many ways the casual observer would say that
he was hopeless. He is a poor performer at Bridge, as I was compelled
to hint to him on Saturday night. His eyes have no animated sparkle of
intelligence. And the cut of his clothes jars my sensitive soul to its
foundations. I don't wish to speak ill of a man behind his back, but I
must confide in you, as my Boyhood's Friend, that he wore a made-up tie
at dinner. But no more of a painful subject. I am working away at him
with a brave smile. Sometimes I think that I am succeeding. Then he
seems to slip back again. However,' concluded the letter, ending on an
optimistic note, 'I think that I shall make a man of him yet--some
day.'

Mike re-read this letter in the train that took him to London. By this
time Psmith would know that his was not the only case in which Commerce
was booming. Mike had written to him by return, telling him of the
disaster which had befallen the house of Jackson. Mike wished he could
have told him in person, for Psmith had a way of treating unpleasant
situations as if he were merely playing at them for his own amusement.
Psmith's attitude towards the slings and arrows of outrageous Fortune
was to regard them with a bland smile, as if they were part of an
entertainment got up for his express benefit.

Arriving at Paddington, Mike stood on the platform, waiting for his box
to emerge from the luggage-van, with mixed feelings of gloom and
excitement. The gloom was in the larger quantities, perhaps, but the
excitement was there, too. It was the first time in his life that he
had been entirely dependent on himself. He had crossed the Rubicon. The
occasion was too serious for him to feel the same helplessly furious
feeling with which he had embarked on life at Sedleigh. It was possible
to look on Sedleigh with quite a personal enmity. London was too big to
be angry with. It took no notice of him. It did not care whether he was
glad to be there or sorry, and there was no means of making it care.
That is the peculiarity of London. There is a sort of cold
unfriendliness about it. A city like New York makes the new arrival
feel at home in half an hour; but London is a specialist in what Psmith
in his letter had called the Distant Stare. You have to buy London's
good-will.

Mike drove across the Park to Victoria, feeling very empty and small.
He had settled on Dulwich as the spot to get lodgings, partly because,
knowing nothing about London, he was under the impression that rooms
anywhere inside the four-mile radius were very expensive, but
principally because there was a school at Dulwich, and it would be a
comfort being near a school. He might get a game of fives there
sometimes, he thought, on a Saturday afternoon, and, in the summer,
occasional cricket.

Wandering at a venture up the asphalt passage which leads from Dulwich
station in the direction of the College, he came out into Acacia Road.
There is something about Acacia Road which inevitably suggests
furnished apartments. A child could tell at a glance that it was
bristling with bed-sitting rooms.

Mike knocked at the first door over which a card hung.

There is probably no more depressing experience in the world than the
process of engaging furnished apartments. Those who let furnished
apartments seem to take no joy in the act. Like Pooh-Bah, they do it,
but it revolts them.

In answer to Mike's knock, a female person opened the door. In
appearance she resembled a pantomime 'dame', inclining towards the
restrained melancholy of Mr Wilkie Bard rather than the joyous abandon
of Mr George Robey. Her voice she had modelled on the gramophone. Her
most recent occupation seemed to have been something with a good deal
of yellow soap in it. As a matter of fact--there are no secrets between
our readers and ourselves--she had been washing a shirt. A useful
occupation, and an honourable, but one that tends to produce a certain
homeliness in the appearance.

She wiped a pair of steaming hands on her apron, and regarded Mike with
an eye which would have been markedly expressionless in a boiled fish.

'Was there anything?' she asked.

Mike felt that he was in for it now. He had not sufficient ease of
manner to back gracefully away and disappear, so he said that there was
something. In point of fact, he wanted a bed-sitting room.

'Orkup stays,' said the pantomime dame. Which Mike interpreted to mean,
would he walk upstairs?

The procession moved up a dark flight of stairs until it came to a
door. The pantomime dame opened this, and shuffled through. Mike stood
in the doorway, and looked in.

It was a repulsive room. One of those characterless rooms which are
only found in furnished apartments. To Mike, used to the comforts of
his bedroom at home and the cheerful simplicity of a school dormitory,
it seemed about the most dismal spot he had ever struck. A sort of
Sargasso Sea among bedrooms.

He looked round in silence. Then he said: 'Yes.' There did not seem
much else to say.

'It's a nice room,' said the pantomime dame. Which was a black lie. It
was not a nice room. It never had been a nice room. And it did not seem
at all probable that it ever would be a nice room. But it looked cheap.
That was the great thing. Nobody could have the assurance to charge
much for a room like that. A landlady with a conscience might even have
gone to the length of paying people some small sum by way of
compensation to them for sleeping in it.

'About what?' queried Mike. Cheapness was the great consideration. He
understood that his salary at the bank would be about four pounds ten a
month, to begin with, and his father was allowing him five pounds a
month. One does not do things _en prince_ on a hundred and
fourteen pounds a year.

The pantomime dame became slightly more animated. Prefacing her remarks
by a repetition of her statement that it was a nice room, she went on
to say that she could 'do' it at seven and sixpence per week 'for
him'--giving him to understand, presumably, that, if the Shah of Persia
or Mr Carnegie ever applied for a night's rest, they would sigh in vain
for such easy terms. And that included lights. Coals were to be looked
on as an extra. 'Sixpence a scuttle.' Attendance was thrown in.

Having stated these terms, she dribbled a piece of fluff under the bed,
after the manner of a professional Association footballer, and relapsed
into her former moody silence.

Mike said he thought that would be all right. The pantomime dame
exhibited no pleasure.

''Bout meals?' she said. 'You'll be wanting breakfast. Bacon, aigs,
an' that, I suppose?'

Mike said he supposed so.

'That'll be extra,' she said. 'And dinner? A chop, or a nice steak?'

Mike bowed before this original flight of fancy. A chop or a nice steak
seemed to be about what he might want.

'That'll be extra,' said the pantomime dame in her best Wilkie Bard
manner.

Mike said yes, he supposed so. After which, having put down seven and
sixpence, one week's rent in advance, he was presented with a grubby
receipt and an enormous latchkey, and the _seance_ was at an end.
Mike wandered out of the house. A few steps took him to the railings
that bounded the College grounds. It was late August, and the evenings
had begun to close in. The cricket-field looked very cool and spacious
in the dim light, with the school buildings looming vague and shadowy
through the slight mist. The little gate by the railway bridge was not
locked. He went in, and walked slowly across the turf towards the big
clump of trees which marked the division between the cricket and
football fields. It was all very pleasant and soothing after the
pantomime dame and her stuffy bed-sitting room. He sat down on a bench
beside the second eleven telegraph-board, and looked across the ground
at the pavilion. For the first time that day he began to feel really
home-sick. Up till now the excitement of a strange venture had borne
him up; but the cricket-field and the pavilion reminded him so sharply
of Wrykyn. They brought home to him with a cutting distinctness, the
absolute finality of his break with the old order of things. Summers
would come and go, matches would be played on this ground with all the
glory of big scores and keen finishes; but he was done. 'He was a jolly
good bat at school. Top of the Wrykyn averages two years. But didn't do
anything after he left. Went into the city or something.' That was what
they would say of him, if they didn't quite forget him.

The clock on the tower over the senior block chimed quarter after
quarter, but Mike sat on, thinking. It was quite late when he got up,
and began to walk back to Acacia Road. He felt cold and stiff and very
miserable.


4. First Steps in a Business Career


The City received Mike with the same aloofness with which the more
western portion of London had welcomed him on the previous day. Nobody
seemed to look at him. He was permitted to alight at St Paul's and make
his way up Queen Victoria Street without any demonstration. He followed
the human stream till he reached the Mansion House, and eventually
found himself at the massive building of the New Asiatic Bank, Limited.

The difficulty now was to know how to make an effective entrance. There
was the bank, and here was he. How had he better set about breaking it
to the authorities that he had positively arrived and was ready to
start earning his four pound ten _per mensem_? Inside, the bank
seemed to be in a state of some confusion. Men were moving about in an
apparently irresolute manner. Nobody seemed actually to be working. As
a matter of fact, the business of a bank does not start very early in
the morning. Mike had arrived before things had really begun to move.
As he stood near the doorway, one or two panting figures rushed up the
steps, and flung themselves at a large book which stood on the counter
near the door. Mike was to come to know this book well. In it, if you
were an _employe_ of the New Asiatic Bank, you had to inscribe
your name every morning. It was removed at ten sharp to the
accountant's room, and if you reached the bank a certain number of
times in the year too late to sign, bang went your bonus.

After a while things began to settle down. The stir and confusion
gradually ceased. All down the length of the bank, figures could be
seen, seated on stools and writing hieroglyphics in large letters. A
benevolent-looking man, with spectacles and a straggling grey beard,
crossed the gangway close to where Mike was standing. Mike put the
thing to him, as man to man.

'Could you tell me,' he said, 'what I'm supposed to do? I've just
joined the bank.' The benevolent man stopped, and looked at him with a
pair of mild blue eyes. 'I think, perhaps, that your best plan would be
to see the manager,' he said. 'Yes, I should certainly do that. He will
tell you what work you have to do. If you will permit me, I will show
you the way.'

'It's awfully good of you,' said Mike. He felt very grateful. After his
experience of London, it was a pleasant change to find someone who
really seemed to care what happened to him. His heart warmed to the
benevolent man.

'It feels strange to you, perhaps, at first, Mr--'

'Jackson.'

'Mr Jackson. My name is Waller. I have been in the City some time, but
I can still recall my first day. But one shakes down. One shakes down
quite quickly. Here is the manager's room. If you go in, he will tell
you what to do.'

'Thanks awfully,' said Mike.

'Not at all.' He ambled off on the quest which Mike had interrupted,
turning, as he went, to bestow a mild smile of encouragement on the new
arrival. There was something about Mr Waller which reminded Mike
pleasantly of the White Knight in 'Alice through the Looking-glass.'

Mike knocked at the managerial door, and went in.

Two men were sitting at the table. The one facing the door was writing
when Mike went in. He continued to write all the time he was in the
room. Conversation between other people in his presence had apparently
no interest for him, nor was it able to disturb him in any way.

The other man was talking into a telephone. Mike waited till he had
finished. Then he coughed. The man turned round. Mike had thought, as
he looked at his back and heard his voice, that something about his
appearance or his way of speaking was familiar. He was right. The man
in the chair was Mr Bickersdyke, the cross-screen pedestrian.

These reunions are very awkward. Mike was frankly unequal to the
situation. Psmith, in his place, would have opened the conversation,
and relaxed the tension with some remark on the weather or the state of
the crops. Mike merely stood wrapped in silence, as in a garment.

That the recognition was mutual was evident from Mr Bickersdyke's look.
But apart from this, he gave no sign of having already had the pleasure
of making Mike's acquaintance. He merely stared at him as if he were a
blot on the arrangement of the furniture, and said, 'Well?'

The most difficult parts to play in real life as well as on the stage
are those in which no 'business' is arranged for the performer. It was
all very well for Mr Bickersdyke. He had been 'discovered sitting'. But
Mike had had to enter, and he wished now that there was something he
could do instead of merely standing and speaking.

'I've come,' was the best speech he could think of. It was not a good
speech. It was too sinister. He felt that even as he said it. It was
the sort of thing Mephistopheles would have said to Faust by way of
opening conversation. And he was not sure, either, whether he ought not
to have added, 'Sir.'

Apparently such subtleties of address were not necessary, for Mr
Bickersdyke did not start up and shout, 'This language to me!' or
anything of that kind. He merely said, 'Oh! And who are you?'

'Jackson,' said Mike. It was irritating, this assumption on Mr
Bickersdyke's part that they had never met before.

'Jackson? Ah, yes. You have joined the staff?'

Mike rather liked this way of putting it. It lent a certain dignity to
the proceedings, making him feel like some important person for whose
services there had been strenuous competition. He seemed to see the
bank's directors being reassured by the chairman. ('I am happy to say,
gentlemen, that our profits for the past year are 3,000,006-2-2 1/2
pounds--(cheers)--and'--impressively--'that we have finally succeeded
in inducing Mr Mike Jackson--(sensation)--to--er--in fact, to join the
staff!' (Frantic cheers, in which the chairman joined.)

'Yes,' he said.

Mr Bickersdyke pressed a bell on the table beside him, and picking up a
pen, began to write. Of Mike he took no further notice, leaving that
toy of Fate standing stranded in the middle of the room.

After a few moments one of the men in fancy dress, whom Mike had seen
hanging about the gangway, and whom he afterwards found to be
messengers, appeared. Mr Bickersdyke looked up.

'Ask Mr Bannister to step this way,' he said.

The messenger disappeared, and presently the door opened again to admit
a shock-headed youth with paper cuff-protectors round his wrists.

'This is Mr Jackson, a new member of the staff. He will take your place
in the postage department. You will go into the cash department, under
Mr Waller. Kindly show him what he has to do.'

Mike followed Mr Bannister out. On the other side of the door the
shock-headed one became communicative.

'Whew!' he said, mopping his brow. 'That's the sort of thing which
gives me the pip. When William came and said old Bick wanted to see me,
I said to him, "William, my boy, my number is up. This is the sack." I
made certain that Rossiter had run me in for something. He's been
waiting for a chance to do it for weeks, only I've been as good as gold
and haven't given it him. I pity you going into the postage. There's
one thing, though. If you can stick it for about a month, you'll get
through all right. Men are always leaving for the East, and then you
get shunted on into another department, and the next new man goes into
the postage. That's the best of this place. It's not like one of those
banks where you stay in London all your life. You only have three years
here, and then you get your orders, and go to one of the branches in
the East, where you're the dickens of a big pot straight away, with a
big screw and a dozen native Johnnies under you. Bit of all right,
that. I shan't get my orders for another two and a half years and more,
worse luck. Still, it's something to look forward to.'

'Who's Rossiter?' asked Mike.

'The head of the postage department. Fussy little brute. Won't leave
you alone. Always trying to catch you on the hop. There's one thing,
though. The work in the postage is pretty simple. You can't make many
mistakes, if you're careful. It's mostly entering letters and stamping
them.'

They turned in at the door in the counter, and arrived at a desk which
ran parallel to the gangway. There was a high rack running along it, on
which were several ledgers. Tall, green-shaded electric lamps gave it
rather a cosy look.

As they reached the desk, a little man with short, black whiskers
buzzed out from behind a glass screen, where there was another desk.

'Where have you been, Bannister, where have you been? You must not
leave your work in this way. There are several letters waiting to be
entered. Where have you been?'

'Mr Bickersdyke sent for me,' said Bannister, with the calm triumph of
one who trumps an ace.

'Oh! Ah! Oh! Yes, very well. I see. But get to work, get to work. Who
is this?'

'This is a new man. He's taking my place. I've been moved on to the
cash.'

'Oh! Ah! Is your name Smith?' asked Mr Rossiter, turning to Mike.

Mike corrected the rash guess, and gave his name. It struck him as a
curious coincidence that he should be asked if his name were Smith, of
all others. Not that it is an uncommon name.

'Mr Bickersdyke told me to expect a Mr Smith. Well, well, perhaps there
are two new men. Mr Bickersdyke knows we are short-handed in this
department. But, come along, Bannister, come along. Show Jackson what
he has to do. We must get on. There is no time to waste.'

He buzzed back to his lair. Bannister grinned at Mike. He was a
cheerful youth. His normal expression was a grin.

'That's a sample of Rossiter,' he said. 'You'd think from the fuss he's
made that the business of the place was at a standstill till we got to
work. Perfect rot! There's never anything to do here till after lunch,
except checking the stamps and petty cash, and I've done that ages ago.
There are three letters. You may as well enter them. It all looks like
work. But you'll find the best way is to wait till you get a couple of
dozen or so, and then work them off in a batch. But if you see Rossiter
about, then start stamping something or writing something, or he'll run
you in for neglecting your job. He's a nut. I'm jolly glad I'm under
old Waller now. He's the pick of the bunch. The other heads of
departments are all nuts, and Bickersdyke's the nuttiest of the lot.
Now, look here. This is all you've got to do. I'll just show you, and
then you can manage for yourself. I shall have to be shunting off to my
own work in a minute.'


5. The Other Man


As Bannister had said, the work in the postage department was not
intricate. There was nothing much to do except enter and stamp letters,
and, at intervals, take them down to the post office at the end of the
street. The nature of the work gave Mike plenty of time for reflection.

His thoughts became gloomy again. All this was very far removed from
the life to which he had looked forward. There are some people who take
naturally to a life of commerce. Mike was not of these. To him the
restraint of the business was irksome. He had been used to an open-air
life, and a life, in its way, of excitement. He gathered that he would
not be free till five o'clock, and that on the following day he would
come at ten and go at five, and the same every day, except Saturdays
and Sundays, all the year round, with a ten days' holiday. The monotony
of the prospect appalled him. He was not old enough to know what a
narcotic is Habit, and that one can become attached to and interested
in the most unpromising jobs. He worked away dismally at his letters
till he had finished them. Then there was nothing to do except sit and
wait for more.

He looked through the letters he had stamped, and re-read the
addresses. Some of them were directed to people living in the country,
one to a house which he knew quite well, near to his own home in
Shropshire. It made him home-sick, conjuring up visions of shady
gardens and country sounds and smells, and the silver Severn gleaming
in the distance through the trees. About now, if he were not in this
dismal place, he would be lying in the shade in the garden with a book,
or wandering down to the river to boat or bathe. That envelope
addressed to the man in Shropshire gave him the worst moment he had
experienced that day.

The time crept slowly on to one o'clock. At two minutes past Mike awoke
from a day-dream to find Mr Waller standing by his side. The cashier
had his hat on.

'I wonder,' said Mr Waller, 'if you would care to come out to lunch. I
generally go about this time, and Mr Rossiter, I know, does not go out
till two. I thought perhaps that, being unused to the City, you might
have some difficulty in finding your way about.'

'It's awfully good of you,' said Mike. 'I should like to.'

The other led the way through the streets and down obscure alleys till
they came to a chop-house. Here one could have the doubtful pleasure of
seeing one's chop in its various stages of evolution. Mr Waller ordered
lunch with the care of one to whom lunch is no slight matter. Few
workers in the City do regard lunch as a trivial affair. It is the
keynote of their day. It is an oasis in a desert of ink and ledgers.
Conversation in city office deals, in the morning, with what one is
going to have for lunch, and in the afternoon with what one has had for
lunch.

At intervals during the meal Mr Waller talked. Mike was content to
listen. There was something soothing about the grey-bearded one.

'What sort of a man is Bickersdyke?' asked Mike.

'A very able man. A very able man indeed. I'm afraid he's not popular
in the office. A little inclined, perhaps, to be hard on mistakes. I
can remember the time when he was quite different. He and I were fellow
clerks in Morton and Blatherwick's. He got on better than I did. A
great fellow for getting on. They say he is to be the Unionist
candidate for Kenningford when the time comes. A great worker, but
perhaps not quite the sort of man to be generally popular in an
office.'

'He's a blighter,' was Mike's verdict. Mr Waller made no comment. Mike
was to learn later that the manager and the cashier, despite the fact
that they had been together in less prosperous days--or possibly
because of it--were not on very good terms. Mr Bickersdyke was a man of
strong prejudices, and he disliked the cashier, whom he looked down
upon as one who had climbed to a lower rung of the ladder than he
himself had reached.

As the hands of the chop-house clock reached a quarter to two, Mr
Waller rose, and led the way back to the office, where they parted for
their respective desks. Gratitude for any good turn done to him was a
leading characteristic of Mike's nature, and he felt genuinely grateful
to the cashier for troubling to seek him out and be friendly to him.

His three-quarters-of-an-hour absence had led to the accumulation of a
small pile of letters on his desk. He sat down and began to work them
off. The addresses continued to exercise a fascination for him. He was
miles away from the office, speculating on what sort of a man J. B.
Garside, Esq, was, and whether he had a good time at his house in
Worcestershire, when somebody tapped him on the shoulder.

He looked up.

Standing by his side, immaculately dressed as ever, with his eye-glass
fixed and a gentle smile on his face, was Psmith.

Mike stared.

'Commerce,' said Psmith, as he drew off his lavender gloves, 'has
claimed me for her own. Comrade of old, I, too, have joined this
blighted institution.'

As he spoke, there was a whirring noise in the immediate neighbourhood,
and Mr Rossiter buzzed out from his den with the _esprit_ and
animation of a clock-work toy.

'Who's here?' said Psmith with interest, removing his eye-glass,
polishing it, and replacing it in his eye.

'Mr Jackson,' exclaimed Mr Rossiter. 'I really must ask you to be good
enough to come in from your lunch at the proper time. It was fully
seven minutes to two when you returned, and--'

'That little more,' sighed Psmith, 'and how much is it!'

'Who are you?' snapped Mr Rossiter, turning on him.

'I shall be delighted, Comrade--'

'Rossiter,' said Mike, aside.

'Comrade Rossiter. I shall be delighted to furnish you with particulars
of my family history. As follows. Soon after the Norman Conquest, a
certain Sieur de Psmith grew tired of work--a family failing,
alas!--and settled down in this country to live peacefully for the
remainder of his life on what he could extract from the local
peasantry. He may be described as the founder of the family which
ultimately culminated in Me. Passing on--'

Mr Rossiter refused to pass on.

'What are you doing here? What have you come for?'

'Work,' said Psmith, with simple dignity. 'I am now a member of the
staff of this bank. Its interests are my interests. Psmith, the
individual, ceases to exist, and there springs into being Psmith, the
cog in the wheel of the New Asiatic Bank; Psmith, the link in the
bank's chain; Psmith, the Worker. I shall not spare myself,' he
proceeded earnestly. 'I shall toil with all the accumulated energy of
one who, up till now, has only known what work is like from hearsay.
Whose is that form sitting on the steps of the bank in the morning,
waiting eagerly for the place to open? It is the form of Psmith, the
Worker. Whose is that haggard, drawn face which bends over a ledger
long after the other toilers have sped blithely westwards to dine at
Lyons' Popular Cafe? It is the face of Psmith, the Worker.'

'I--' began Mr Rossiter.

'I tell you,' continued Psmith, waving aside the interruption and
tapping the head of the department rhythmically in the region of the
second waistcoat-button with a long finger, 'I tell _you_, Comrade
Rossiter, that you have got hold of a good man. You and I together, not
forgetting Comrade Jackson, the pet of the Smart Set, will toil early
and late till we boost up this Postage Department into a shining model
of what a Postage Department should be. What that is, at present, I do
not exactly know. However. Excursion trains will be run from distant
shires to see this Postage Department. American visitors to London will
do it before going on to the Tower. And now,' he broke off, with a
crisp, businesslike intonation, 'I must ask you to excuse me. Much as I
have enjoyed this little chat, I fear it must now cease. The time has
come to work. Our trade rivals are getting ahead of us. The whisper
goes round, "Rossiter and Psmith are talking, not working," and other
firms prepare to pinch our business. Let me Work.'

Two minutes later, Mr Rossiter was sitting at his desk with a dazed
expression, while Psmith, perched gracefully on a stool, entered
figures in a ledger.


6. Psmith Explains


For the space of about twenty-five minutes Psmith sat in silence,
concentrated on his ledger, the picture of the model bank-clerk. Then
he flung down his pen, slid from his stool with a satisfied sigh, and
dusted his waistcoat. 'A commercial crisis,' he said, 'has passed. The
job of work which Comrade Rossiter indicated for me has been completed
with masterly skill. The period of anxiety is over. The bank ceases to
totter. Are you busy, Comrade Jackson, or shall we chat awhile?'

Mike was not busy. He had worked off the last batch of letters, and
there was nothing to do but to wait for the next, or--happy thought--to
take the present batch down to the post, and so get out into the
sunshine and fresh air for a short time. 'I rather think I'll nip down
to the post-office,' said he, 'You couldn't come too, I suppose?'

'On the contrary,' said Psmith, 'I could, and will. A stroll will just
restore those tissues which the gruelling work of the last half-hour
has wasted away. It is a fearful strain, this commercial toil. Let us
trickle towards the post office. I will leave my hat and gloves as a
guarantee of good faith. The cry will go round, "Psmith has gone! Some
rival institution has kidnapped him!" Then they will see my hat,'--he
built up a foundation of ledgers, planted a long ruler in the middle,
and hung his hat on it--'my gloves,'--he stuck two pens into the desk
and hung a lavender glove on each--'and they will sink back swooning
with relief. The awful suspense will be over. They will say, "No, he
has not gone permanently. Psmith will return. When the fields are white
with daisies he'll return." And now, Comrade Jackson, lead me to this
picturesque little post-office of yours of which I have heard so much.'

Mike picked up the long basket into which he had thrown the letters
after entering the addresses in his ledger, and they moved off down the
aisle. No movement came from Mr Rossiter's lair. Its energetic occupant
was hard at work. They could just see part of his hunched-up back.

'I wish Comrade Downing could see us now,' said Psmith. 'He always set
us down as mere idlers. Triflers. Butterflies. It would be a wholesome
corrective for him to watch us perspiring like this in the cause of
Commerce.'

'You haven't told me yet what on earth you're doing here,' said Mike.
'I thought you were going to the 'Varsity. Why the dickens are you in a
bank? Your pater hasn't lost his money, has he?'

'No. There is still a tolerable supply of doubloons in the old oak
chest. Mine is a painful story.'

'It always is,' said Mike.

'You are very right, Comrade Jackson. I am the victim of Fate. Ah, so
you put the little chaps in there, do you?' he said, as Mike, reaching
the post-office, began to bundle the letters into the box. 'You seem to
have grasped your duties with admirable promptitude. It is the same
with me. I fancy we are both born men of Commerce. In a few years we
shall be pinching Comrade Bickersdyke's job. And talking of Comrade B.
brings me back to my painful story. But I shall never have time to tell
it to you during our walk back. Let us drift aside into this tea-shop.
We can order a buckwheat cake or a butter-nut, or something equally
succulent, and carefully refraining from consuming these dainties, I
will tell you all.'

'Right O!' said Mike.

'When last I saw you,' resumed Psmith, hanging Mike's basket on the
hat-stand and ordering two portions of porridge, 'you may remember that
a serious crisis in my affairs had arrived. My father inflamed with the
idea of Commerce had invited Comrade Bickersdyke--'

'When did you know he was a manager here?' asked Mike.

'At an early date. I have my spies everywhere. However, my pater
invited Comrade Bickersdyke to our house for the weekend. Things turned
out rather unfortunately. Comrade B. resented my purely altruistic
efforts to improve him mentally and morally. Indeed, on one occasion he
went so far as to call me an impudent young cub, and to add that he
wished he had me under him in his bank, where, he asserted, he would
knock some of the nonsense out of me. All very painful. I tell you,
Comrade Jackson, for the moment it reduced my delicately vibrating
ganglions to a mere frazzle. Recovering myself, I made a few blithe
remarks, and we then parted. I cannot say that we parted friends, but
at any rate I bore him no ill-will. I was still determined to make him
a credit to me. My feelings towards him were those of some kindly
father to his prodigal son. But he, if I may say so, was fairly on the
hop. And when my pater, after dinner the same night, played into his
hands by mentioning that he thought I ought to plunge into a career of
commerce, Comrade B. was, I gather, all over him. Offered to make a
vacancy for me in the bank, and to take me on at once. My pater,
feeling that this was the real hustle which he admired so much, had me
in, stated his case, and said, in effect, "How do we go?" I intimated
that Comrade Bickersdyke was my greatest chum on earth. So the thing
was fixed up and here I am. But you are not getting on with your
porridge, Comrade Jackson. Perhaps you don't care for porridge? Would
you like a finnan haddock, instead? Or a piece of shortbread? You have
only to say the word.'

'It seems to me,' said Mike gloomily, 'that we are in for a pretty
rotten time of it in this bally bank. If Bickersdyke's got his knife
into us, he can make it jolly warm for us. He's got his knife into me
all right about that walking-across-the-screen business.'

'True,' said Psmith, 'to a certain extent. It is an undoubted fact that
Comrade Bickersdyke will have a jolly good try at making life a
nuisance to us; but, on the other hand, I propose, so far as in me
lies, to make things moderately unrestful for him, here and there.'

'But you can't,' objected Mike. 'What I mean to say is, it isn't like a
school. If you wanted to score off a master at school, you could always
rag and so on. But here you can't. How can you rag a man who's sitting
all day in a room of his own while you're sweating away at a desk at
the other end of the building?'

'You put the case with admirable clearness, Comrade Jackson,' said
Psmith approvingly. 'At the hard-headed, common-sense business you
sneak the biscuit every time with ridiculous case. But you do not know
all. I do not propose to do a thing in the bank except work. I shall be
a model as far as work goes. I shall be flawless. I shall bound to do
Comrade Rossiter's bidding like a highly trained performing dog. It is
outside the bank, when I have staggered away dazed with toil, that I
shall resume my attention to the education of Comrade Bickersdyke.'

'But, dash it all, how can you? You won't see him. He'll go off home,
or to his club, or--'

Psmith tapped him earnestly on the chest.

'There, Comrade Jackson,' he said, 'you have hit the bull's-eye, rung
the bell, and gathered in the cigar or cocoanut according to choice. He
_will_ go off to his club. And I shall do precisely the same.'

'How do you mean?'

'It is this way. My father, as you may have noticed during your stay at
our stately home of England, is a man of a warm, impulsive character.
He does not always do things as other people would do them. He has his
own methods. Thus, he has sent me into the City to do the hard-working,
bank-clerk act, but at the same time he is allowing me just as large an
allowance as he would have given me if I had gone to the 'Varsity.
Moreover, while I was still at Eton he put my name up for his clubs,
the Senior Conservative among others. My pater belongs to four
clubs altogether, and in course of time, when my name comes up for
election, I shall do the same. Meanwhile, I belong to one, the Senior
Conservative. It is a bigger club than the others, and your name comes
up for election sooner. About the middle of last month a great yell of
joy made the West End of London shake like a jelly. The three thousand
members of the Senior Conservative had just learned that I had been
elected.'

Psmith paused, and ate some porridge.

'I wonder why they call this porridge,' he observed with mild interest.
'It would be far more manly and straightforward of them to give it its
real name. To resume. I have gleaned, from casual chit-chat with my
father, that Comrade Bickersdyke also infests the Senior Conservative.
You might think that that would make me, seeing how particular I am
about whom I mix with, avoid the club. Error. I shall go there every
day. If Comrade Bickersdyke wishes to emend any little traits in my
character of which he may disapprove, he shall never say that I did not
give him the opportunity. I shall mix freely with Comrade Bickersdyke
at the Senior Conservative Club. I shall be his constant companion. I
shall, in short, haunt the man. By these strenuous means I shall, as it
were, get a bit of my own back. And now,' said Psmith, rising, 'it
might be as well, perhaps, to return to the bank and resume our
commercial duties. I don't know how long you are supposed to be allowed
for your little trips to and from the post-office, but, seeing that the
distance is about thirty yards, I should say at a venture not more than
half an hour. Which is exactly the space of time which has flitted by
since we started out on this important expedition. Your devotion to
porridge, Comrade Jackson, has led to our spending about twenty-five
minutes in this hostelry.'

'Great Scott,' said Mike, 'there'll be a row.'

'Some slight temporary breeze, perhaps,' said Psmith. 'Annoying to men
of culture and refinement, but not lasting. My only fear is lest we may
have worried Comrade Rossiter at all. I regard Comrade Rossiter as an
elder brother, and would not cause him a moment's heart-burning for
worlds. However, we shall soon know,' he added, as they passed into the
bank and walked up the aisle, 'for there is Comrade Rossiter waiting to
receive us in person.'

The little head of the Postage Department was moving restlessly about
in the neighbourhood of Psmith's and Mike's desk.

'Am I mistaken,' said Psmith to Mike, 'or is there the merest suspicion
of a worried look on our chief's face? It seems to me that there is the
slightest soupcon of shadow about that broad, calm brow.'


7. Going into Winter Quarters


There was.

Mr Rossiter had discovered Psmith's and Mike's absence about five
minutes after they had left the building. Ever since then, he had been
popping out of his lair at intervals of three minutes, to see whether
they had returned. Constant disappointment in this respect had rendered
him decidedly jumpy. When Psmith and Mike reached the desk, he was a
kind of human soda-water bottle. He fizzed over with questions,
reproofs, and warnings.

'What does it mean? What does it mean?' he cried. 'Where have you been?
Where have you been?'

'Poetry,' said Psmith approvingly.

'You have been absent from your places for over half an hour. Why? Why?
Why? Where have you been? Where have you been? I cannot have this. It
is preposterous. Where have you been? Suppose Mr Bickersdyke had
happened to come round here. I should not have known what to say to
him.'

'Never an easy man to chat with, Comrade Bickersdyke,' agreed Psmith.

'You must thoroughly understand that you are expected to remain in your
places during business hours.'

'Of course,' said Psmith, 'that makes it a little hard for Comrade
Jackson to post letters, does it not?'

'Have you been posting letters?'

'We have,' said Psmith. 'You have wronged us. Seeing our absent places
you jumped rashly to the conclusion that we were merely gadding about
in pursuit of pleasure. Error. All the while we were furthering the
bank's best interests by posting letters.'

'You had no business to leave your place. Jackson is on the posting
desk.'

'You are very right,' said Psmith, 'and it shall not occur again. It
was only because it was the first day, Comrade Jackson is not used to
the stir and bustle of the City. His nerve failed him. He shrank from
going to the post-office alone. So I volunteered to accompany him.
And,' concluded Psmith, impressively, 'we won safely through. Every
letter has been posted.'

'That need not have taken you half an hour.'

'True. And the actual work did not. It was carried through swiftly and
surely. But the nerve-strain had left us shaken. Before resuming our
more ordinary duties we had to refresh. A brief breathing-space, a
little coffee and porridge, and here we are, fit for work once more.'

'If it occurs again, I shall report the matter to Mr Bickersdyke.'

'And rightly so,' said Psmith, earnestly. 'Quite rightly so.
Discipline, discipline. That is the cry. There must be no shirking of
painful duties. Sentiment must play no part in business. Rossiter, the
man, may sympathise, but Rossiter, the Departmental head, must be
adamant.'

Mr Rossiter pondered over this for a moment, then went off on a
side-issue.

'What is the meaning of this foolery?' he asked, pointing to Psmith's
gloves and hat. 'Suppose Mr Bickersdyke had come round and seen them,
what should I have said?'

'You would have given him a message of cheer. You would have said, "All
is well. Psmith has not left us. He will come back. And Comrade
Bickersdyke, relieved, would have--"'

'You do not seem very busy, Mr Smith.'

Both Psmith and Mr Rossiter were startled.

Mr Rossiter jumped as if somebody had run a gimlet into him, and even
Psmith started slightly. They had not heard Mr Bickersdyke approaching.
Mike, who had been stolidly entering addresses in his ledger during the
latter part of the conversation, was also taken by surprise.

Psmith was the first to recover. Mr Rossiter was still too confused for
speech, but Psmith took the situation in hand.

'Apparently no,' he said, swiftly removing his hat from the ruler. 'In
reality, yes. Mr Rossiter and I were just scheming out a line of work
for me as you came up. If you had arrived a moment later, you would
have found me toiling.'

'H'm. I hope I should. We do not encourage idling in this bank.'

'Assuredly not,' said Psmith warmly. 'Most assuredly not. I would not
have it otherwise. I am a worker. A bee, not a drone. A
_Lusitania,_ not a limpet. Perhaps I have not yet that grip on my
duties which I shall soon acquire; but it is coming. It is coming. I
see daylight.'

'H'm. I have only your word for it.' He turned to Mr Rossiter, who had
now recovered himself, and was as nearly calm as it was in his nature
to be. 'Do you find Mr Smith's work satisfactory, Mr Rossiter?'

Psmith waited resignedly for an outburst of complaint respecting the
small matter that had been under discussion between the head of the
department and himself; but to his surprise it did not come.

'Oh--ah--quite, quite, Mr Bickersdyke. I think he will very soon pick
things up.'

Mr Bickersdyke turned away. He was a conscientious bank manager, and
one can only suppose that Mr Rossiter's tribute to the earnestness of
one of his _employes_ was gratifying to him. But for that, one would have
said that he was disappointed.

'Oh, Mr Bickersdyke,' said Psmith.

The manager stopped.

'Father sent his kind regards to you,' said Psmith benevolently.

Mr Bickersdyke walked off without comment.

'An uncommonly cheery, companionable feller,' murmured Psmith, as he
turned to his work.


The first day anywhere, if one spends it in a sedentary fashion, always
seemed unending; and Mike felt as if he had been sitting at his desk
for weeks when the hour for departure came. A bank's day ends
gradually, reluctantly, as it were. At about five there is a sort of
stir, not unlike the stir in a theatre when the curtain is on the point
of falling. Ledgers are closed with a bang. Men stand about and talk
for a moment or two before going to the basement for their hats and
coats. Then, at irregular intervals, forms pass down the central aisle
and out through the swing doors. There is an air of relaxation over the
place, though some departments are still working as hard as ever under
a blaze of electric light. Somebody begins to sing, and an instant
chorus of protests and maledictions rises from all sides. Gradually,
however, the electric lights go out. The procession down the centre
aisle becomes more regular; and eventually the place is left to
darkness and the night watchman.

The postage department was one of the last to be freed from duty. This
was due to the inconsiderateness of the other departments, which
omitted to disgorge their letters till the last moment. Mike as he grew
familiar with the work, and began to understand it, used to prowl round
the other departments during the afternoon and wrest letters from them,
usually receiving with them much abuse for being a nuisance and not
leaving honest workers alone. Today, however, he had to sit on till
nearly six, waiting for the final batch of correspondence.

Psmith, who had waited patiently with him, though his own work was
finished, accompanied him down to the post office and back again to the
bank to return the letter basket; and they left the office together.

'By the way,' said Psmith, 'what with the strenuous labours of the bank
and the disturbing interviews with the powers that be, I have omitted
to ask you where you are digging. Wherever it is, of course you must
clear out. It is imperative, in this crisis, that we should be
together. I have acquired a quite snug little flat in Clement's Inn.
There is a spare bedroom. It shall be yours.'

'My dear chap,' said Mike, 'it's all rot. I can't sponge on you.'

'You pain me, Comrade Jackson. I was not suggesting such a thing. We
are business men, hard-headed young bankers. I make you a business
proposition. I offer you the post of confidential secretary and adviser
to me in exchange for a comfortable home. The duties will be light. You
will be required to refuse invitations to dinner from crowned heads,
and to listen attentively to my views on Life. Apart from this, there
is little to do. So that's settled.'

'It isn't,' said Mike. 'I--'

'You will enter upon your duties tonight. Where are you suspended at
present?'

'Dulwich. But, look here--'

'A little more, and you'll get the sack. I tell you the thing is
settled. Now, let us hail yon taximeter cab, and desire the stern-faced
aristocrat on the box to drive us to Dulwich. We will then collect a
few of your things in a bag, have the rest off by train, come back in
the taxi, and go and bite a chop at the Carlton. This is a momentous
day in our careers, Comrade Jackson. We must buoy ourselves up.'

Mike made no further objections. The thought of that bed-sitting room
in Acacia Road and the pantomime dame rose up and killed them. After
all, Psmith was not like any ordinary person. There would be no
question of charity. Psmith had invited him to the flat in exactly the
same spirit as he had invited him to his house for the cricket week.

'You know,' said Psmith, after a silence, as they flitted through the
streets in the taximeter, 'one lives and learns. Were you so wrapped up
in your work this afternoon that you did not hear my very entertaining
little chat with Comrade Bickersdyke, or did it happen to come under
your notice? It did? Then I wonder if you were struck by the singular
conduct of Comrade Rossiter?'

'I thought it rather decent of him not to give you away to that
blighter Bickersdyke.'

'Admirably put. It was precisely that that struck me. He had his
opening, all ready made for him, but he refrained from depositing me in
the soup. I tell you, Comrade Jackson, my rugged old heart was touched.
I said to myself, "There must be good in Comrade Rossiter, after all. I
must cultivate him." I shall make it my business to be kind to our
Departmental head. He deserves the utmost consideration. His action
shone like a good deed in a wicked world. Which it was, of course. From
today onwards I take Comrade Rossiter under my wing. We seem to be
getting into a tolerably benighted quarter. Are we anywhere near?
"Through Darkest Dulwich in a Taximeter."'

The cab arrived at Dulwich station, and Mike stood up to direct the
driver. They whirred down Acacia Road. Mike stopped the cab and got
out. A brief and somewhat embarrassing interview with the pantomime
dame, during which Mike was separated from a week's rent in lieu of
notice, and he was in the cab again, bound for Clement's Inn.

His feelings that night differed considerably from the frame of mind in
which he had gone to bed the night before. It was partly a very
excellent dinner and partly the fact that Psmith's flat, though at
present in some disorder, was obviously going to be extremely
comfortable, that worked the change. But principally it was due to his
having found an ally. The gnawing loneliness had gone. He did not look
forward to a career of Commerce with any greater pleasure than before;
but there was no doubt that with Psmith, it would be easier to get
through the time after office hours. If all went well in the bank he
might find that he had not drawn such a bad ticket after all.


8. The Friendly Native


'The first principle of warfare,' said Psmith at breakfast next
morning, doling out bacon and eggs with the air of a medieval monarch
distributing largesse, 'is to collect a gang, to rope in allies, to
secure the cooperation of some friendly native. You may remember that
at Sedleigh it was partly the sympathetic cooperation of that record
blitherer, Comrade Jellicoe, which enabled us to nip the pro-Spiller
movement in the bud. It is the same in the present crisis. What Comrade
Jellicoe was to us at Sedleigh, Comrade Rossiter must be in the City.
We must make an ally of that man. Once I know that he and I are as
brothers, and that he will look with a lenient and benevolent eye on
any little shortcomings in my work, I shall be able to devote my
attention whole-heartedly to the moral reformation of Comrade
Bickersdyke, that man of blood. I look on Comrade Bickersdyke as a
bargee of the most pronounced type; and anything I can do towards
making him a decent member of Society shall be done freely and
ungrudgingly. A trifle more tea, Comrade Jackson?'

'No, thanks,' said Mike. 'I've done. By Jove, Smith, this flat of yours
is all right.'

'Not bad,' assented Psmith, 'not bad. Free from squalor to a great
extent. I have a number of little objects of _vertu_ coming down
shortly from the old homestead. Pictures, and so on. It will be by no
means un-snug when they are up. Meanwhile, I can rough it. We are old
campaigners, we Psmiths. Give us a roof, a few comfortable chairs, a
sofa or two, half a dozen cushions, and decent meals, and we do not
repine. Reverting once more to Comrade Rossiter--'

'Yes, what about him?' said Mike. 'You'll have a pretty tough job
turning him into a friendly native, I should think. An Italian peasant-woman
may trust Providence for her gown, but ear-rings she attends to
herself,--for what is life without them?

The great pearl ear-rings of the Sorrento women are accumulated,
pearl by pearl, as the price of years of labor.

Giulietta, however, had come into the world, so to speak, with a gold
spoon in her mouth,--since her grandmother, a thriving, stirring,
energetic body, had got together a pair of ear-rings of unmatched
size, which had descended as heirlooms to her, leaving her nothing
to do but display them, which she did with the freest good-will.

At present she was busily occupied in coquetting with a tall and
jauntily-dressed fellow, wearing a plumed hat and a red sash, who
seemed to be mesmerized by the power of her charms, his large dark
eyes following every movement, as she now talked with him gayly and
freely, and now pretended errands to this and that and the other
person on the bridge, stationing herself here and there, that she
might have the pleasure of seeing herself followed.

"Giulietta," at last said the young man, earnestly, when he found her
accidentally standing alone by the parapet, "I must be going
to-morrow."
"Well, what is that to me?" said Giulietta, looking wickedly from under
her eyelashes.

"Cruel girl!

you know"----
"Nonsense, Pietro! I don't know anything about you"; but as
Giulietta said this, her great, soft, dark eyes looked out furtively,
and said just the contrary.

"You will go with me?"

"Did I ever hear anything like it? One can't be civil to a fellow
but he asks her to go to the world's end. Pray, how far is it to
your dreadful old den?"

"Only two days' journey, Giulietta."
"Two days!"
"Yes, my life; and you shall ride."
"Thank you, Sir,--I wasn't thinking of walking. But seriously, Pietro, I
am afraid it's no place for an honest girl to be in."

"There are lots of honest women there,--all our men have wives; and our
captain has put his eye on one, too, or I'm mistaken."
"What! little Agnes?"

said Giulietta. "He will be bright that gets her.

That old dragon of a grandmother is as tight to her as her skin."

"Our captain is used to helping himself," said Pietro.

"We might carry them both off some night, and no one the wiser; but he
seems to want to win the girl to come to him of her own accord. At
any rate, we are to be sent back to the mountains while he lingers a
day or two more round here."

"I declare, Pietro, I think you all little better than Turks or heathens,
to talk in that way about carrying off women; and what if one should
be sick and die among you? What is to become of one's soul, I wonder?"

"Pshaw! don't we have priests? Why, Giulietta, we are all very
pious, and never think of going out without saying our prayers. The
Madonna is a kind Mother, and will wink very hard on the sins of such
good sons as we are. There isn't a place in all Italy where she is
kept better in candles, and in rings and bracelets, and everything a
woman could want.
We never come home without bringing her something; and then we have lots
left to dress all our women like princesses; and they have nothing
to do from morning till night but play the lady. Come now?"
At the moment this conversation was going on in the balmy, seductive
evening air at the bridge, another was transpiring in the Albergo
della Torre, one of those dark, musty dens of which we have been
speaking.

In a damp, dirty chamber, whose brick floor seemed to have been
unsuspicious of even the existence of brooms for centuries, was
sitting the cavalier whom we have so often named in connection with
Agnes.

His easy, high-bred air, his graceful, flexible form and handsome
face formed a singular contrast to the dark and mouldy apartment, at
whose single unglazed window he was sitting. The sight of this
splendid man gave an impression of strangeness, in the general
bareness, much as if some marvellous jewel had been unaccountably
found lying on that dusty brick floor.

He sat deep in thought, with his elbow resting on a rickety table,
his large, piercing, dark eyes seeming intently to study the
pavement.

The door opened, and a gray-headed old man entered, who approached him
respectfully.

"Well, Paolo?" said the cavalier, suddenly starting.

"My Lord, the men are all going back to-night."

"Let them go, then," said the cavalier, with an impatient movement.

"I can follow in a day or two."

"Ah, my Lord, if I might make so bold, why should you expose your
person by staying longer?

You may be recognized and"----
"No danger," said the other, hastily.

"My Lord, you must forgive me, but I promised my dear lady, your mother,
on her death-bed"----
"To be a constant plague to me," said the cavalier, with a vexed
smile and an impatient movement; "but speak on, Paolo,--for when
you once get anything on your mind, one may as well hear it first
as last."

"Well, then, my Lord, this girl,--I have made inquiries, and every
one reports her most modest and pious,--the only grandchild of a
poor old woman.

Is it worthy of a great lord of an ancient house to bring her
to shame?"

"Who thinks of bringing her to shame?

'Lord of an ancient house'!"

added the cavalier, laughing bitterly,--"a landless beggar, cast out of
everything,--titles, estates, all! Am I, then, fallen so low that my
wooing would disgrace a peasant-girl?"
"My Lord, you cannot mean to woo a peasant-girl in any other way
than one that would disgrace her,--one of the House of Sarelli,
that goes back to the days of the old Roman Empire!"

"And what of the 'House of Sarelli that goes back to the days of the old
Roman Empire'? It is lying like weeds' roots uppermost in the
burning sun.

What is left to me but the mountains and my sword? No, I tell you, Paolo,
Agostino Sarelli, cavalier of fortune, is not thinking of bringing
disgrace on a pious and modest maiden, unless it would disgrace her
to be his wife."

"Now may the saints above help us!

Why, my Lord, our house in days past has been allied to royal blood.
I could tell you how Joachim VI."--
"Come, come, my good Paolo, spare me one of your chapters of
genealogy.

The fact is, my old boy, the world is all topsy-turvy, and the
bottom is the top, and it isn't much matter what comes next.

Here are shoals of noble families uprooted and lying round like
those aloes that the gardener used to throw over the wall in
spring-time; and there is that great boar of a Caesar Borgia turned
in to batten and riot over our pleasant places."

"Oh, my Lord," said the old serving-man, with a distressful movement,
"we have fallen on evil times, to be sure, and they say his Holiness
has excommunicated us. Anselmo heard that in Naples yesterday."

"Excommunicated!"

said the young man,--every feature of his fine face, and every
nerve of his graceful form seeming to quiver with the effort to
express supreme contempt. "Excommunicated! I should _hope_ so!
One would hope through Our Lady's grace to act so that Alexander,
and his adulterous, incestuous, filthy, false-swearing, perjured,
murderous crew, _would_ excommunicate us!

In these times, one's only hope of paradise lies in being
excommunicated."

"Oh, my dear master," said the old man, falling on his knees, "what
is to become of us? That I should live to hear you talk like an infidel
and unbeliever!"

"Why, hear you, poor old fool! Did you never hear in Dante of the
Popes that are burning in hell? Wasn't Dante a Christian, I beg to
know?"

"Oh, my Lord, my Lord! a religion got out of poetry, books, and romances
won't do to die by. We have no business with the affairs of the
Head of the Church,--it's the Lord's appointment.

We have only to shut our eyes and obey. It may all do well enough
to talk so when you are young and fresh; but when sickness and
death come, then we _must_ have religion,-- and if we have gone out
of the only true Roman Catholic Apostolic Church, what becomes of
our souls? Ah, I misdoubted about your taking so much to poetry, though
my poor mistress was so proud of it; but these poets are all heretics,
my Lord,--that's my firm belief. But, my Lord, if you do go to hell, I'm
going there with you; I'm sure I never could show my face among the
saints, and you not there."

"Well, come, then, my poor Paolo," said the cavalier, stretching out
his hand to his serving-man, "don't take it to heart so.

Many a better man than I has been excommunicated and cursed from toe
to crown, and been never a whit the worse for it. There's Jerome Savonarola
there in Florence--a most holy man, they say, who has had revelations
straight from heaven--has been excommunicated; but he preaches and
gives the sacraments all the same, and nobody minds it."
"Well, it's all a maze to me," said the old serving-man, shaking his
white head. "I can't see into it, I don't dare to open my eyes for
fear I should get to be a heretic; it seems to me that everything
is getting mixed up together.

But one must hold on to one's religion; because, after we have lost
everything in this world, it would be too bad to burn in hell forever
at the end of that."

"Why, Paolo, I am a good Christian.

I believe, with all my heart, in the Christian religion, like the
fellow in Boccaccio,--because I think it must be from God, or else
the Popes and Cardinals would have had it out of the world long ago.

Nothing but the Lord Himself could have kept it against them."
"There you are, my dear master, with your romances! Well, well,
well! I don't know how it'll end.

I say my prayers, and try not to inquire into what's too high for me.
But now, dear master, will you stay lingering after this girl till
some of our enemies hear where you are and pounce down upon us?

Besides, the troop are never so well affected when you are away; there
are quarrels and divisions."
"Well, well," said the cavalier, with an impatient movement,--"one
day longer.

I must get a chance to speak with her once more.

I _must_ see her."
* * * * *

SUN-PAINTING AND SUN-SCULPTURE;
WITH A STEREOSCOPIC TRIP ACROSS THE ATLANTIC.

There is one old fable which Lord Bacon, in his "Wisdom of the
Ancients," has not interpreted.

This is the flaying of Marsyas by Apollo.

Everybody remembers the accepted version of it, namely,--that the
young shepherd found Minerva's flute, and was rash enough to enter
into a musical contest with the God of Music.

He was vanquished, of course,--and the story is, that the victor
fastened him to a tree and flayed him alive.

But the God of Song was also the God of Light, and a moment's
reflection reveals the true significance of this seemingly barbarous
story.

Apollo was pleased with his young rival, fixed him in position against
an iron rest, (the _tree_ of the fable,) and took a _photograph_,
a sun-picture, of him.

This thin film or _skin_ of light and shade was absurdly interpreted
as being the _cutis_, or untanned leather integument of the young
shepherd.

The human discovery of the art of photography enables us to rectify
the error and restore that important article of clothing to the
youth, as well as to vindicate the character of Apollo.

There is one spot less upon the sun since the theft from heaven of
Prometheus Daguerre and his fellow-adventurers has enabled us to
understand the ancient legend.

We are now flaying our friends and submitting to be flayed ourselves,
every few years or months or days, by the aid of the trenchant
sunbeam which performed the process for Marsyas.

All the world has to submit to it,--kings and queens with the rest.

The monuments of Art and the face of Nature herself are treated in
the same way.

We lift an impalpable scale from the surface of the Pyramids.

We slip off from the dome of St.

Peter's that other imponderable dome which fitted it so closely
that it betrays every scratch on the original.

We skim off a thin, dry cuticle from the rapids of Niagara, and lay
it on our unmoistened paper without breaking a bubble or losing a
speck of foam.

We steal a landscape from its lawful owners, and defy the charge
of dishonesty.

We skin the flints by the wayside, and nobody accuses us of meanness.

These miracles are being worked all around us so easily and so
cheaply that most people have ceased to think of them as marvels.

There is a photographer established in every considerable village,--nay,
one may not unfrequently see a photographic _ambulance_ standing
at the wayside upon some vacant lot where it can squat unchallenged
in the midst of burdock and plantain and apple-Peru, or making a
long halt in the middle of a common by special permission of the
"Selectmen."

We must not forget the inestimable preciousness of the new Promethean
gifts because they have become familiar.

Think first of the privilege we all possess now of preserving the
lineaments and looks of those dear to us.

"Blest be the art which can immortalize," 
said Cowper.

But remember how few painted portraits really give their subjects.
Recollect those wandering Thugs of Art whose murderous doings with
the brush used frequently to involve whole families; who passed from
one country tavern to another, eating and painting their way,--feeding
a week upon the landlord, another week upon the landlady, and two or
three days apiece upon the children; as the walls of those hospitable
edifices too frequently testify even to the present day. Then see
what faithful memorials of those whom we love and would remember
are put into our hands by the new art, with the most trifling
expenditure of time and money.

This new art is old enough already to have given us the portraits
of infants who are now growing into adolescence.

By-and-by it will show every aspect of life in the same individual,
from the earliest week to the last year of senility. We are beginning
to see what it will reveal.
Children grow into beauty and out of it. The first line in the forehead,
the first streak in the hair are chronicled without malice, but without
extenuation. The footprints of thought, of passion, of purpose
are all treasured in these fossilized shadows. Family-traits show
themselves in early infancy, die out, and reappear. Flitting moods
which have escaped one pencil of sunbeams are caught by another. Each
new picture gives us a new aspect of our friend; we find he had
not one face, but many.

It is hardly too much to say, that those whom we love no longer
leave us in dying, as they did of old. They remain with us just as
they appeared in life; they look down upon us from our walls; they
lie upon our tables; they rest upon our bosoms; nay, if we
will, we may wear their portraits, like signet-rings, upon our
fingers. Our own eyes lose the images pictured on them. Parents sometimes
forget the faces of their own children in a separation of a year or
two. But the unfading artificial retina which has looked upon them
retains their impress, and a fresh sunbeam lays this on the living
nerve as if it were radiated from the breathing shape.

How these shadows last, and how their originals fade away!

What is true of the faces of our friends is still more true of the places
we have seen and loved. No picture produces an impression on the imagination
to compare with a photographic transcript of the home of our
childhood, or any scene with which we have been long familiar.

The very point which the artist omits, in his effort to produce general
effect, may be exactly the one that individualizes the place
most strongly to our memory. There, for instance, is a
photographic view of our own birthplace, and with it of a part of
our good old neighbor's dwelling.
An artist would hardly have noticed a slender, dry, leafless stalk
which traces a faint line, as you may see, along the front of our
neighbor's house next the corner.

That would be nothing to him,--but to us it marks the stem of the
_honeysuckle-vine_, which we remember, with its pink and white
heavy-scented blossoms, as long as we remember the stars in heaven.

To this charm of fidelity in the minutest details the stereoscope
adds its astonishing illusion of solidity, and thus completes the
effect which so entrances the imagination. Perhaps there
is also some half-magnetic effect in the fixing of the eyes on the
twin pictures,--something like Mr. Braid's _hypnotism_, of which
many of our readers have doubtless heard. At least the shutting out
of surrounding objects, and the concentration of the whole attention,
which is a consequence of this, produce a dream-like exaltation of the
faculties, a kind of clairvoyance, in which we seem to leave the body
behind us and sail away into one strange scene after another, like
disembodied spirits.

"Ah, yes," some unimaginative reader may say; "but there is no color
and no motion in these pictures you think so life-like; and at best
they are but petty miniatures of the objects we see in Nature."

But color is, after all, a very secondary quality as compared with
form.

We like a good crayon portrait better for the most part in black
and white than in tints of pink and blue and brown.

Mr. Gibson has never succeeded in making the world like his flesh-colored
statues.

The color of a landscape varies perpetually, with the season, with
the hour of the day, with the weather, and as seen by sunlight or
moonlight; yet our home stirs us with its old associations, seen
in any and every light.

As to motion, though of course it is not present in stereoscopic
pictures, except in those toy-contrivances which have been lately
introduced, yet it is wonderful to see how nearly the effect of
motion is produced by the slight difference of light on the water
or on the leaves of trees as seen by the two eyes in the
double-picture.

And lastly with respect to size, the illusion is on the part
of those who suppose that the eye, unaided, ever sees anything but
miniatures of objects. Here is a new experiment to convince those who
have not reflected on the subject that the stereoscope shows us
objects of their natural size.

We had a stereoscopic view taken by Mr.

Soule out of our parlor-window, overlooking the town of Cambridge,
with the river and the bridge in the foreground.

Now, placing this view in the stereoscope, and looking with the
left eye at the right stereographic picture, while the right eye
looked at the natural landscape, through the window where the view
was taken, it was not difficult so to adjust the photographic and
real views that one overlapped the other, and then it was shown
that the two almost exactly coincided in all their dimensions.

Another point in which the stereograph differs from every other
delineation is in the character of its evidence.

A simple photographic picture may be tampered with.

A lady's portrait has been known to come out of the finishing-artist's
room ten years younger than when it left the camera.

But try to mend a stereograph and you will soon find the difference. Your
marks and patches float above the picture and never identify
themselves with it.

We had occasion to put a little cross on the pavement of a double photograph
of Canterbury Cathedral,--copying another stereoscopic picture where
it was thus marked.

By careful management the two crosses were made perfectly to coincide
in the field of vision, but the image seemed suspended above the
pavement, and did not absolutely designate any one stone, as it
would have done, if it had been a part of the original picture.

The impossibility of the stereograph's perjuring itself is a curious
illustration of the law of evidence.

"At the mouth of _two witnesses_, or of three, shall he that is
worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one he shall
not be put to death."

No woman may be declared youthful on the strength of a single photograph;
but if the stereoscopic twins say she is young, let her be so
acknowledged in the high court of chancery of the God of Love.

Some two or three years since, we called the attention of the readers
of this magazine to the subject of the stereoscope and the
stereograph.

Some of our expressions may have seemed extravagant, as if heated
by the interest which a curious novelty might not unnaturally excite.

We have not lost any of the enthusiasm and delight which that article
must have betrayed.

After looking over perhaps a hundred thousand stereographs and making
a collection of about a thousand, we should feel the same excitement
on receiving a new lot to look over and select from as in those early
days of our experience. To make sure that this early interest has not
cooled, let us put on record one or two convictions of the present
moment.

First, as to the wonderful nature of the invention.

If a strange planet should happen to come within hail, and one of
its philosophers were to ask us, as it passed, to hand him the most
remarkable material product of human skill, we should offer him,
without a moment's hesitation, a stereoscope containing an
_instantaneous_ double-view of some great thoroughfare,--one of Mr.

Anthony's views of Broadway, (No. 203,) for instance.

Secondly, of all artificial contrivances for the gratification of
human taste, we seriously question whether any offers so much, on
the whole, to the enjoyment of the civilized races as the self-picturing
of Art and Nature,--with three exceptions: namely, dress, the most
universal, architecture, the most imposing, and music, the most
exciting, of factitious sources of pleasure.

No matter whether this be an extravagance or an over-statement;
none can dispute that we have a new and wonderful source of pleasure
in the sun-picture, and especially in the solid sun-_sculptures_
of the stereograph.

Yet there is a strange indifference to it, even up to the present
moment, among many persons of cultivation and taste. They do not seem
to have waked up to the significance of the miracle which the Lord of
Light is working for them.
His only hope was to catch Psmith doing his work badly.

He touched the bell again, and sent for Mr Rossiter.

The messenger found the head of the Postage Department in conversation
with Psmith. Manchester United had been beaten by one goal to nil on
the previous afternoon, and Psmith was informing Mr Rossiter that the
referee was a robber, who had evidently been financially interested in
the result of the game. The way he himself looked at it, said Psmith,
was that the thing had been a moral victory for the United. Mr Rossiter
said yes, he thought so too. And it was at this moment that Mr
Bickersdyke sent for him to ask whether Psmith's work was satisfactory.

The head of the Postage Department gave his opinion without hesitation.
Psmith's work was about the hottest proposition he had ever struck.
Psmith's work--well, it stood alone. You couldn't compare it with
anything. There are no degrees in perfection. Psmith's work was
perfect, and there was an end to it.

He put it differently, but that was the gist of what he said.

Mr Bickersdyke observed he was glad to hear it, and smashed a nib by
stabbing the desk with it.

It was on the evening following this that the bank-manager was due to
address a meeting at the Kenningford Town Hall.

He was looking forward to the event with mixed feelings. He had stood
for Parliament once before, several years back, in the North. He had
been defeated by a couple of thousand votes, and he hoped that the
episode had been forgotten. Not merely because his defeat had been
heavy. There was another reason. On that occasion he had stood as a
Liberal. He was standing for Kenningford as a Unionist. Of course, a
man is at perfect liberty to change his views, if he wishes to do so,
but the process is apt to give his opponents a chance of catching him
(to use the inspired language of the music-halls) on the bend. Mr
Bickersdyke was rather afraid that the light-hearted electors of
Kenningford might avail themselves of this chance.

Kenningford, S.E., is undoubtedly by way of being a tough sort of
place. Its inhabitants incline to a robust type of humour, which finds
a verbal vent in catch phrases and expends itself physically in
smashing shop-windows and kicking policemen. He feared that the meeting
at the Town Hall might possibly be a trifle rowdy.

All political meetings are very much alike. Somebody gets up and
introduces the speaker of the evening, and then the speaker of the
evening says at great length what he thinks of the scandalous manner in
which the Government is behaving or the iniquitous goings-on of the
Opposition. From time to time confederates in the audience rise and ask
carefully rehearsed questions, and are answered fully and
satisfactorily by the orator. When a genuine heckler interrupts, the
orator either ignores him, or says haughtily that he can find him
arguments but cannot find him brains. Or, occasionally, when the
question is an easy one, he answers it. A quietly conducted political
meeting is one of England's most delightful indoor games. When the
meeting is rowdy, the audience has more fun, but the speaker a good
deal less.

Mr Bickersdyke's introducer was an elderly Scotch peer, an excellent
man for the purpose in every respect, except that he possessed a very
strong accent.

The audience welcomed that accent uproariously. The electors of
Kenningford who really had any definite opinions on politics were
fairly equally divided. There were about as many earnest Liberals as
there were earnest Unionists. But besides these there was a strong
contingent who did not care which side won. These looked on elections
as Heaven-sent opportunities for making a great deal of noise. They
attended meetings in order to extract amusement from them; and they
voted, if they voted at all, quite irresponsibly. A funny story at the
expense of one candidate told on the morning of the polling, was quite
likely to send these brave fellows off in dozens filling in their
papers for the victim's opponent.

There was a solid block of these gay spirits at the back of the hall.
They received the Scotch peer with huge delight. He reminded them of
Harry Lauder and they said so. They addressed him affectionately as
'Arry', throughout his speech, which was rather long. They implored him
to be a pal and sing 'The Saftest of the Family'. Or, failing that, 'I
love a lassie'. Finding they could not induce him to do this, they did
it themselves. They sang it several times. When the peer, having
finished his remarks on the subject of Mr Bickersdyke, at length sat
down, they cheered for seven minutes, and demanded an encore.

The meeting was in excellent spirits when Mr Bickersdyke rose to
address it.

The effort of doing justice to the last speaker had left the free and
independent electors at the back of the hall slightly limp. The
bank-manager's opening remarks were received without any demonstration.

Mr Bickersdyke spoke well. He had a penetrating, if harsh, voice, and
he said what he had to say forcibly. Little by little the audience came
under his spell. When, at the end of a well-turned sentence, he paused
and took a sip of water, there was a round of applause, in which many
of the admirers of Mr Harry Lauder joined.

He resumed his speech. The audience listened intently. Mr Bickersdyke,
having said some nasty things about Free Trade and the Alien Immigrant,
turned to the Needs of the Navy and the necessity of increasing the
fleet at all costs.

'This is no time for half-measures,' he said. 'We must do our utmost.
We must burn our boats--'

'Excuse me,' said a gentle voice.

Mr Bickersdyke broke off. In the centre of the hall a tall figure had
risen. Mr Bickersdyke found himself looking at a gleaming eye-glass
which the speaker had just polished and inserted in his eye.

The ordinary heckler Mr Bickersdyke would have taken in his stride. He
had got his audience, and simply by continuing and ignoring the
interruption, he could have won through in safety. But the sudden
appearance of Psmith unnerved him. He remained silent.

'How,' asked Psmith, 'do you propose to strengthen the Navy by burning
boats?'

The inanity of the question enraged even the pleasure-seekers at the
back.

'Order! Order!' cried the earnest contingent.

'Sit down, fice!' roared the pleasure-seekers.

Psmith sat down with a patient smile.

Mr Bickersdyke resumed his speech. But the fire had gone out of it. He
had lost his audience. A moment before, he had grasped them and played
on their minds (or what passed for minds down Kenningford way) as on a
stringed instrument. Now he had lost his hold.

He spoke on rapidly, but he could not get into his stride. The trivial
interruption had broken the spell. His words lacked grip. The dead
silence in which the first part of his speech had been received, that
silence which is a greater tribute to the speaker than any applause,
had given place to a restless medley of little noises; here a cough;
there a scraping of a boot along the floor, as its wearer moved
uneasily in his seat; in another place a whispered conversation. The
audience was bored.

Mr Bickersdyke left the Navy, and went on to more general topics. But
he was not interesting. He quoted figures, saw a moment later that he
had not quoted them accurately, and instead of carrying on boldly, went
back and corrected himself.

'Gow up top!' said a voice at the back of the hall, and there was a
general laugh.

Mr Bickersdyke galloped unsteadily on. He condemned the Government. He
said they had betrayed their trust.

And then he told an anecdote.

'The Government, gentlemen,' he said, 'achieves nothing worth
achieving, and every individual member of the Government takes all the
credit for what is done to himself. Their methods remind me, gentlemen,
of an amusing experience I had while fishing one summer in the Lake
District.'

In a volume entitled 'Three Men in a Boat' there is a story of how the
author and a friend go into a riverside inn and see a very large trout
in a glass case. They make inquiries about it, have men assure them,
one by one, that the trout was caught by themselves. In the end the
trout turns out to be made of plaster of Paris.

Mr Bickersdyke told that story as an experience of his own while
fishing one summer in the Lake District.

It went well. The meeting was amused. Mr Bickersdyke went on to draw a
trenchant comparison between the lack of genuine merit in the trout and
the lack of genuine merit in the achievements of His Majesty's
Government.

There was applause.

When it had ceased, Psmith rose to his feet again.

'Excuse me,' he said.


11. Misunderstood


Mike had refused to accompany Psmith to the meeting that evening,
saying that he got too many chances in the ordinary way of business of
hearing Mr Bickersdyke speak, without going out of his way to make
more. So Psmith had gone off to Kenningford alone, and Mike, feeling
too lazy to sally out to any place of entertainment, had remained at
the flat with a novel.

He was deep in this, when there was the sound of a key in the latch,
and shortly afterwards Psmith entered the room. On Psmith's brow there
was a look of pensive care, and also a slight discoloration. When he
removed his overcoat, Mike saw that his collar was burst and hanging
loose and that he had no tie. On his erstwhile speckless and gleaming
shirt front were number of finger-impressions, of a boldness and
clearness of outline which would have made a Bertillon expert leap with
joy.

'Hullo!' said Mike dropping his book.

Psmith nodded in silence, went to his bedroom, and returned with a
looking-glass. Propping this up on a table, he proceeded to examine
himself with the utmost care. He shuddered slightly as his eye fell on
the finger-marks; and without a word he went into his bathroom again.
He emerged after an interval of ten minutes in sky-blue pyjamas,
slippers, and an Old Etonian blazer. He lit a cigarette; and, sitting
down, stared pensively into the fire.

'What the dickens have you been playing at?' demanded Mike.

Psmith heaved a sigh.

'That,' he replied, 'I could not say precisely. At one moment it seemed
to be Rugby football, at another a jiu-jitsu _seance_. Later, it
bore a resemblance to a pantomime rally. However, whatever it was, it
was all very bright and interesting. A distinct experience.'

'Have you been scrapping?' asked Mike. 'What happened? Was there a
row?'

'There was,' said Psmith, 'in a measure what might be described as a
row. At least, when you find a perfect stranger attaching himself to
your collar and pulling, you begin to suspect that something of that
kind is on the bill.'

'Did they do that?'

Psmith nodded.

'A merchant in a moth-eaten bowler started warbling to a certain extent
with me. It was all very trying for a man of culture. He was a man who
had, I should say, discovered that alcohol was a food long before the
doctors found it out. A good chap, possibly, but a little boisterous in
his manner. Well, well.'

Psmith shook his head sadly.

'He got you one on the forehead,' said Mike, 'or somebody did. Tell us
what happened. I wish the dickens I'd come with you. I'd no notion
there would be a rag of any sort. What did happen?'

'Comrade Jackson,' said Psmith sorrowfully, 'how sad it is in this life
of ours to be consistently misunderstood. You know, of course, how
wrapped up I am in Comrade Bickersdyke's welfare. You know that all my
efforts are directed towards making a decent man of him; that, in
short, I am his truest friend. Does he show by so much as a word that
he appreciates my labours? Not he. I believe that man is beginning to
dislike me, Comrade Jackson.'

'What happened, anyhow? Never mind about Bickersdyke.'

'Perhaps it was mistaken zeal on my part.... Well, I will tell you all.
Make a long arm for the shovel, Comrade Jackson, and pile on a few more
coals. I thank you. Well, all went quite smoothly for a while. Comrade
B. in quite good form. Got his second wind, and was going strong for the
tape, when a regrettable incident occurred. He informed the meeting,
that while up in the Lake country, fishing, he went to an inn and saw
a remarkably large stuffed trout in a glass case. He made inquiries,
and found that five separate and distinct people had caught--'

'Why, dash it all,' said Mike, 'that's a frightful chestnut.'

Psmith nodded.

'It certainly has appeared in print,' he said. 'In fact I should have
said it was rather a well-known story. I was so interested in Comrade
Bickersdyke's statement that the thing had happened to himself that,
purely out of good-will towards him, I got up and told him that I
thought it was my duty, as a friend, to let him know that a man named
Jerome had pinched his story, put it in a book, and got money by it.
Money, mark you, that should by rights have been Comrade Bickersdyke's.
He didn't appear to care much about sifting the matter thoroughly. In
fact, he seemed anxious to get on with his speech, and slur the matter
over. But, tactlessly perhaps, I continued rather to harp on the thing.
I said that the book in which the story had appeared was published in
1889. I asked him how long ago it was that he had been on his fishing
tour, because it was important to know in order to bring the charge
home against Jerome. Well, after a bit, I was amazed, and pained, too,
to hear Comrade Bickersdyke urging certain bravoes in the audience to
turn me out. If ever there was a case of biting the hand that fed
him.... Well, well.... By this time the meeting had begun to take sides
to some extent. What I might call my party, the Earnest Investigators,
were whistling between their fingers, stamping on the floor, and
shouting, "Chestnuts!" while the opposing party, the bravoes, seemed to
be trying, as I say, to do jiu-jitsu tricks with me. It was a painful
situation. I know the cultivated man of affairs should have passed the
thing off with a short, careless laugh; but, owing to the
above-mentioned alcohol-expert having got both hands under my collar,
short, careless laughs were off. I was compelled, very reluctantly, to
conclude the interview by tapping the bright boy on the jaw. He took
the hint, and sat down on the floor. I thought no more of the matter,
and was making my way thoughtfully to the exit, when a second man of
wrath put the above on my forehead. You can't ignore a thing like that.
I collected some of his waistcoat and one of his legs, and hove him
with some vim into the middle distance. By this time a good many of the
Earnest Investigators were beginning to join in; and it was just there
that the affair began to have certain points of resemblance to a
pantomime rally. Everybody seemed to be shouting a good deal and
hitting everybody else. It was no place for a man of delicate culture,
so I edged towards the door, and drifted out. There was a cab in the
offing. I boarded it. And, having kicked a vigorous politician in the
stomach, as he was endeavouring to climb in too, I drove off home.'

Psmith got up, looked at his forehead once more in the glass, sighed,
and sat down again.

'All very disturbing,' he said.

'Great Scott,' said Mike, 'I wish I'd come. Why on earth didn't you
tell me you were going to rag? I think you might as well have done. I
wouldn't have missed it for worlds.'

Psmith regarded him with raised eyebrows.

'Rag!' he said. 'Comrade Jackson, I do not understand you. You surely
do not think that I had any other object in doing what I did than to
serve Comrade Bickersdyke? It's terrible how one's motives get
distorted in this world of ours.'

'Well,' said Mike, with a grin, 'I know one person who'll jolly well
distort your motives, as you call it, and that's Bickersdyke.'

Psmith looked thoughtful.

'True,' he said, 'true. There is that possibility. I tell you, Comrade
Jackson, once more that my bright young life is being slowly blighted
by the frightful way in which that man misunderstands me. It seems
almost impossible to try to do him a good turn without having the
action misconstrued.'

'What'll you say to him tomorrow?'

'I shall make no allusion to the painful affair. If I happen to meet
him in the ordinary course of business routine, I shall pass some
light, pleasant remark--on the weather, let us say, or the Bank
rate--and continue my duties.'

'How about if he sends for you, and wants to do the light, pleasant
remark business on his own?'

'In that case I shall not thwart him. If he invites me into his private
room, I shall be his guest, and shall discuss, to the best of my
ability, any topic which he may care to introduce. There shall be no
constraint between Comrade Bickersdyke and myself.'

'No, I shouldn't think there would be. I wish I could come and hear
you.'

'I wish you could,' said Psmith courteously.

'Still, it doesn't matter much to you. You don't care if you do get
sacked.'

Psmith rose.

'In that way possibly, as you say, I am agreeably situated. If the New
Asiatic Bank does not require Psmith's services, there are other
spheres where a young man of spirit may carve a place for himself. No,
what is worrying me, Comrade Jackson, is not the thought of the push.
It is the growing fear that Comrade Bickersdyke and I will never
thoroughly understand and appreciate one another. A deep gulf lies
between us. I do what I can do to bridge it over, but he makes no
response. On his side of the gulf building operations appear to be at
an entire standstill. That is what is carving these lines of care on my
forehead, Comrade Jackson. That is what is painting these purple
circles beneath my eyes. Quite inadvertently to be disturbing Comrade
Bickersdyke, annoying him, preventing him from enjoying life. How sad
this is. Life bulges with these tragedies.'

Mike picked up the evening paper.

'Don't let it keep you awake at night,' he said. 'By the way, did you
see that Manchester United were playing this afternoon? They won. You'd
better sit down and sweat up some of the details. You'll want them
tomorrow.'

'You are very right, Comrade Jackson,' said Psmith, reseating himself.
'So the Mancunians pushed the bulb into the meshes beyond the uprights
no fewer than four times, did they? Bless the dear boys, what spirits
they do enjoy, to be sure. Comrade Jackson, do not disturb me. I must
concentrate myself. These are deep waters.'


12. In a Nutshell


Mr Bickersdyke sat in his private room at the New Asiatic Bank with a
pile of newspapers before him. At least, the casual observer would have
said that it was Mr Bickersdyke. In reality, however, it was an active
volcano in the shape and clothes of the bank-manager. It was freely
admitted in the office that morning that the manager had lowered all
records with ease. The staff had known him to be in a bad temper
before--frequently; but his frame of mind on all previous occasions had
been, compared with his present frame of mind, that of a rather
exceptionally good-natured lamb. Within ten minutes of his arrival the
entire office was on the jump. The messengers were collected in a
pallid group in the basement, discussing the affair in whispers and
endeavouring to restore their nerve with about sixpenn'orth of the
beverage known as 'unsweetened'. The heads of departments, to a man,
had bowed before the storm. Within the space of seven minutes and a
quarter Mr Bickersdyke had contrived to find some fault with each of
them. Inward Bills was out at an A.B.C. shop snatching a hasty cup of
coffee, to pull him together again. Outward Bills was sitting at his
desk with the glazed stare of one who has been struck in the thorax by
a thunderbolt. Mr Rossiter had been torn from Psmith in the middle of a
highly technical discussion of the Manchester United match, just as he
was showing--with the aid of a ball of paper--how he had once seen
Meredith centre to Sandy Turnbull in a Cup match, and was now leaping
about like a distracted grasshopper. Mr Waller, head of the Cash
Department, had been summoned to the Presence, and after listening
meekly to a rush of criticism, had retired to his desk with the air of
a beaten spaniel.

Only one man of the many in the building seemed calm and happy--Psmith.

Psmith had resumed the chat about Manchester United, on Mr Rossiter's
return from the lion's den, at the spot where it had been broken off;
but, finding that the head of the Postage Department was in no mood for
discussing football (or any thing else), he had postponed his remarks
and placidly resumed his work.

Mr Bickersdyke picked up a paper, opened it, and began searching the
columns. He had not far to look. It was a slack season for the
newspapers, and his little trouble, which might have received a
paragraph in a busy week, was set forth fully in three-quarters of a
column.

The column was headed, 'Amusing Heckling'.

Mr Bickersdyke read a few lines, and crumpled the paper up with a
snort.

The next he examined was an organ of his own shade of political
opinion. It too, gave him nearly a column, headed 'Disgraceful Scene at
Kenningford'. There was also a leaderette on the subject.

The leaderette said so exactly what Mr Bickersdyke thought himself that
for a moment he was soothed. Then the thought of his grievance
returned, and he pressed the bell.

'Send Mr Smith to me,' he said.

William, the messenger, proceeded to inform Psmith of the summons.

Psmith's face lit up.

'I am always glad to sweeten the monotony of toil with a chat with
Little Clarence,' he said. 'I shall be with him in a moment.'

He cleaned his pen very carefully, placed it beside his ledger, flicked
a little dust off his coatsleeve, and made his way to the manager's
room.

Mr Bickersdyke received him with the ominous restraint of a tiger
crouching for its spring. Psmith stood beside the table with languid
grace, suggestive of some favoured confidential secretary waiting for
instructions.

A ponderous silence brooded over the room for some moments. Psmith
broke it by remarking that the Bank Rate was unchanged. He mentioned
this fact as if it afforded him a personal gratification.

Mr Bickersdyke spoke.

'Well, Mr Smith?' he said.

'You wished to see me about something, sir?' inquired Psmith,
ingratiatingly.

'You know perfectly well what I wished to see you about. I want to hear
your explanation of what occurred last night.'

'May I sit, sir?'

He dropped gracefully into a chair, without waiting for permission,
and, having hitched up the knees of his trousers, beamed winningly at
the manager.

'A deplorable affair,' he said, with a shake of his head. 'Extremely
deplorable. We must not judge these rough, uneducated men too harshly,
however. In a time of excitement the emotions of the lower classes are
easily stirred. Where you or I would--'

Mr Bickersdyke interrupted.

'I do not wish for any more buffoonery, Mr Smith--'

Psmith raised a pained pair of eyebrows.

'Buffoonery, sir!'

'I cannot understand what made you act as you did last night, unless
you are perfectly mad, as I am beginning to think.'

'But, surely, sir, there was nothing remarkable in my behaviour? When a
merchant has attached himself to your collar, can you do less than
smite him on the other cheek? I merely acted in self-defence. You saw
for yourself--'

'You know what I am alluding to. Your behaviour during my speech.'

'An excellent speech,' murmured Psmith courteously.

'Well?' said Mr Bickersdyke.

'It was, perhaps, mistaken zeal on my part, sir, but you must remember
that I acted purely from the best motives. It seemed to me--'

'That is enough, Mr Smith. I confess that I am absolutely at a loss to
understand you--'

'It is too true, sir,' sighed Psmith.

'You seem,' continued Mr Bickersdyke, warming to his subject, and
turning gradually a richer shade of purple, 'you seem to be determined
to endeavour to annoy me.' ('No no,' from Psmith.) 'I can only assume
that you are not in your right senses. You follow me about in my club--'

'Our club, sir,' murmured Psmith.

'Be good enough not to interrupt me, Mr Smith. You dog my footsteps in
my club--'

'Purely accidental, sir. We happen to meet--that is all.'

'You attend meetings at which I am speaking, and behave in a perfectly
imbecile manner.'

Psmith moaned slightly.

'It may seem humorous to you, but I can assure you it is extremely bad
policy on your part. The New Asiatic Bank is no place for humour, and I
think--'

'Excuse me, sir,' said Psmith.

The manager started at the familiar phrase. The plum-colour of his
complexion deepened.

'I entirely agree with you, sir,' said Psmith, 'that this bank is no
place for humour.'

'Very well, then. You--'

'And I am never humorous in it. I arrive punctually in the morning,
and I work steadily and earnestly till my labours are completed. I
think you will find, on inquiry, that Mr Rossiter is satisfied with my
work.'

'That is neither here nor--'

'Surely, sir,' said Psmith, 'you are wrong? Surely your jurisdiction
ceases after office hours? Any little misunderstanding we may have at
the close of the day's work cannot affect you officially. You could
not, for instance, dismiss me from the service of the bank if we were
partners at bridge at the club and I happened to revoke.'

'I can dismiss you, let me tell you, Mr Smith, for studied insolence,
whether in the office or not.'

'I bow to superior knowledge,' said Psmith politely, 'but I confess I
doubt it. And,' he added, 'there is another point. May I continue to
some extent?'

'If you have anything to say, say it.'

Psmith flung one leg over the other, and settled his collar.

'It is perhaps a delicate matter,' he said, 'but it is best to be
frank. We should have no secrets. To put my point quite clearly, I must
go back a little, to the time when you paid us that very welcome
week-end visit at our house in August.'

'If you hope to make capital out of the fact that I have been a guest
of your father--'

'Not at all,' said Psmith deprecatingly. 'Not at all. You do not take
me. My point is this. I do not wish to revive painful memories, but it
cannot be denied that there was, here and there, some slight bickering
between us on that occasion. The fault,' said Psmith magnanimously,
'was possibly mine. I may have been too exacting, too capricious.
Perhaps so. However, the fact remains that you conceived the happy
notion of getting me into this bank, under the impression that, once I
was in, you would be able to--if I may use the expression--give me
beans. You said as much to me, if I remember. I hate to say it, but
don't you think that if you give me the sack, although my work is
satisfactory to the head of my department, you will be by way of
admitting that you bit off rather more than you could chew? I merely
make the suggestion.'

Mr Bickersdyke half rose from his chair.

'You--'

'Just so, just so, but--to return to the main point--don't you? The
whole painful affair reminds me of the story of Agesilaus and the
Petulant Pterodactyl, which as you have never heard, I will now proceed
to relate. Agesilaus--'

Mr Bickersdyke made a curious clucking noise in his throat.

'I am boring you,' said Psmith, with ready tact. 'Suffice it to say
that Comrade Agesilaus interfered with the pterodactyl, which was doing
him no harm; and the intelligent creature, whose motto was "Nemo me
impune lacessit", turned and bit him. Bit him good and hard, so that
Agesilaus ever afterwards had a distaste for pterodactyls. His
reluctance to disturb them became quite a byword. The Society papers of
the period frequently commented upon it. Let us draw the parallel.'

Here Mr Bickersdyke, who had been clucking throughout this speech,
essayed to speak; but Psmith hurried on.

'You are Agesilaus,' he said. 'I am the Petulant Pterodactyl. You, if I
may say so, butted in of your own free will, and took me from a happy
home, simply in order that you might get me into this place under you,
and give me beans. But, curiously enough, the major portion of that
vegetable seems to be coming to you. Of course, you can administer the
push if you like; but, as I say, it will be by way of a confession that
your scheme has sprung a leak. Personally,' said Psmith, as one friend
to another, 'I should advise you to stick it out. You never know what
may happen. At any moment I may fall from my present high standard of
industry and excellence; and then you have me, so to speak, where the
hair is crisp.'

He paused. Mr Bickersdyke's eyes, which even in their normal state
protruded slightly, now looked as if they might fall out at any moment.
His face had passed from the plum-coloured stage to something beyond.
Every now and then he made the clucking noise, but except for that he
was silent. Psmith, having waited for some time for something in the
shape of comment or criticism on his remarks, now rose.

'It has been a great treat to me, this little chat,' he said affably,
'but I fear that I must no longer allow purely social enjoyments to
interfere with my commercial pursuits. With your permission, I will
rejoin my department, where my absence is doubtless already causing
comment and possibly dismay. But we shall be meeting at the club
shortly, I hope. Good-bye, sir, good-bye.'

He left the room, and walked dreamily back to the Postage Department,
leaving the manager still staring glassily at nothing.


13. Mike is Moved On


This episode may be said to have concluded the first act of the
commercial drama in which Mike and Psmith had been cast for leading
parts. And, as usually happens after the end of an act, there was a
lull for a while until things began to work up towards another climax.
Mike, as day succeeded day, began to grow accustomed to the life of the
bank, and to find that it had its pleasant side after all. Whenever a
number of people are working at the same thing, even though that thing
is not perhaps what they would have chosen as an object in life, if
left to themselves, there is bound to exist an atmosphere of
good-fellowship; something akin to, though a hundred times weaker
than, the public school spirit. Such a community lacks the main motive
of the public school spirit, which is pride in the school and its
achievements. Nobody can be proud of the achievements of a bank. When
the business of arranging a new Japanese loan was given to the New
Asiatic Bank, its employees did not stand on stools, and cheer. On the
contrary, they thought of the extra work it would involve; and they
cursed a good deal, though there was no denying that it was a big thing
for the bank--not unlike winning the Ashburton would be to a school.
There is a cold impersonality about a bank. A school is a living thing.

Setting aside this important difference, there was a good deal of the
public school about the New Asiatic Bank. The heads of departments were
not quite so autocratic as masters, and one was treated more on a
grown-up scale, as man to man; but, nevertheless, there remained a
distinct flavour of a school republic. Most of the men in the bank,
with the exception of certain hard-headed Scotch youths drafted in from
other establishments in the City, were old public school men. Mike
found two Old Wrykinians in the first week. Neither was well known to
him. They had left in his second year in the team. But it was pleasant
to have them about, and to feel that they had been educated at the
right place.

As far as Mike's personal comfort went, the presence of these two
Wrykinians was very much for the good. Both of them knew all about his
cricket, and they spread the news. The New Asiatic Bank, like most
London banks, was keen on sport, and happened to possess a cricket team
which could make a good game with most of the second-rank clubs. The
disappearance to the East of two of the best bats of the previous
season caused Mike's advent to be hailed with a good deal of
enthusiasm. Mike was a county man. He had only played once for his
county, it was true, but that did not matter. He had passed the barrier
which separates the second-class bat from the first-class, and the bank
welcomed him with awe. County men did not come their way every day.

Mike did not like being in the bank, considered in the light of a
career. But he bore no grudge against the inmates of the bank, such as
he had borne against the inmates of Sedleigh. He had looked on the
latter as bound up with the school, and, consequently, enemies. His
fellow workers in the bank he regarded as companions in misfortune.
They were all in the same boat together. There were men from Tonbridge,
Dulwich, Bedford, St Paul's, and a dozen other schools. One or two of
them he knew by repute from the pages of Wisden. Bannister, his
cheerful predecessor in the Postage Department, was the Bannister, he
recollected now, who had played for Geddington against Wrykyn in his
second year in the Wrykyn team. Munroe, the big man in the Fixed
Deposits, he remembered as leader of the Ripton pack. Every day brought
fresh discoveries of this sort, and each made Mike more reconciled to
his lot. They were a pleasant set of fellows in the New Asiatic Bank,
and but for the dreary outlook which the future held--for Mike, unlike
most of his follow workers, was not attracted by the idea of a life in
the East--he would have been very fairly content.

The hostility of Mr Bickersdyke was a slight drawback. Psmith had
developed a habit of taking Mike with him to the club of an evening;
and this did not do anything towards wiping out of the manager's mind
the recollection of his former passage of arms with the Old Wrykinian.
The glass remaining Set Fair as far as Mr Rossiter's approval was
concerned, Mike was enabled to keep off the managerial carpet to a
great extent; but twice, when he posted letters without going through
the preliminary formality of stamping them, Mr Bickersdyke had
opportunities of which he availed himself. But for these incidents life
was fairly enjoyable. Owing to Psmith's benevolent efforts, the Postage
Department became quite a happy family, and ex-occupants of the postage
desk, Bannister especially, were amazed at the change that had come
over Mr Rossiter. He no longer darted from his lair like a pouncing
panther. To report his subordinates to the manager seemed now to be a
lost art with him. The sight of Psmith and Mr Rossiter proceeding high
and disposedly to a mutual lunch became quite common, and ceased to
excite remark.

'By kindness,' said Psmith to Mike, after one of these expeditions. 'By
tact and kindness. That is how it is done. I do not despair of training
Comrade Rossiter one of these days to jump through paper hoops.'

So that, altogether, Mike's life in the bank had become very fairly
pleasant.

Out of office-hours he enjoyed himself hugely. London was strange to
him, and with Psmith as a companion, he extracted a vast deal of
entertainment from it. Psmith was not unacquainted with the West End,
and he proved an excellent guide. At first Mike expostulated with
unfailing regularity at the other's habit of paying for everything, but
Psmith waved aside all objections with languid firmness.

'I need you, Comrade Jackson,' he said, when Mike lodged a protest on
finding himself bound for the stalls for the second night in
succession. 'We must stick together. As my confidential secretary and
adviser, your place is by my side. Who knows but that between the acts
tonight I may not be seized with some luminous thought? Could I utter
this to my next-door neighbour or the programme-girl? Stand by me,
Comrade Jackson, or we are undone.'

So Mike stood by him.

By this time Mike had grown so used to his work that he could tell to
within five minutes when a rush would come; and he was able to spend a
good deal of his time reading a surreptitious novel behind a pile of
ledgers, or down in the tea-room. The New Asiatic Bank supplied tea to
its employees. In quality it was bad, and the bread-and-butter
associated with it was worse. But it had the merit of giving one an
excuse for being away from one's desk. There were large printed notices
all over the tea-room, which was in the basement, informing gentlemen
that they were only allowed ten minutes for tea, but one took just as
long as one thought the head of one's department would stand, from
twenty-five minutes to an hour and a quarter.

This state of things was too good to last. Towards the beginning of the
New Year a new man arrived, and Mike was moved on to another
department.


14. Mr Waller Appears in a New Light


The department into which Mike was sent was the Cash, or, to be more
exact, that section of it which was known as Paying Cashier. The
important task of shooting doubloons across the counter did not belong
to Mike himself, but to Mr Waller. Mike's work was less ostentatious,
and was performed with pen, ink, and ledgers in the background.
Occasionally, when Mr Waller was out at lunch, Mike had to act as
substitute for him, and cash cheques; but Mr Waller always went out at
a slack time, when few customers came in, and Mike seldom had any very
startling sum to hand over.

He enjoyed being in the Cash Department. He liked Mr Waller. The work
was easy; and when he did happen to make mistakes, they were corrected
patiently by the grey-bearded one, and not used as levers for boosting
him into the presence of Mr Bickersdyke, as they might have been in
some departments. The cashier seemed to have taken a fancy to Mike; and
Mike, as was usually the way with him when people went out of their way
to be friendly, was at his best. Mike at his ease and unsuspicious of
hostile intentions was a different person from Mike with his prickles
out.

Psmith, meanwhile, was not enjoying himself. It was an unheard-of
thing, he said, depriving a man of his confidential secretary without
so much as asking his leave.

'It has caused me the greatest inconvenience,' he told Mike, drifting
round in a melancholy way to the Cash Department during a slack spell
one afternoon. 'I miss you at every turn. Your keen intelligence and
ready sympathy were invaluable to me. Now where am I? In the cart. I
evolved a slightly bright thought on life just now. There was nobody to
tell it to except the new man. I told it him, and the fool gaped. I
tell you, Comrade Jackson, I feel like some lion that has been robbed
of its cub. I feel as Marshall would feel if they took Snelgrove away
from him, or as Peace might if he awoke one morning to find Plenty
gone. Comrade Rossiter does his best. We still talk brokenly about
Manchester United--they got routed in the first round of the Cup
yesterday and Comrade Rossiter is wearing black--but it is not the
same. I try work, but that is no good either. From ledger to ledger
they hurry me, to stifle my regret. And when they win a smile from me,
they think that I forget. But I don't. I am a broken man. That new
exhibit they've got in your place is about as near to the Extreme Edge
as anything I've ever seen. One of Nature's blighters. Well, well, I
must away. Comrade Rossiter awaits me.'

Mike's successor, a youth of the name of Bristow, was causing Psmith a
great deal of pensive melancholy. His worst defect--which he could not
help--was that he was not Mike. His others--which he could--were
numerous. His clothes were cut in a way that harrowed Psmith's sensitive
soul every time he looked at them. The fact that he wore detachable
cuffs, which he took off on beginning work and stacked in a glistening
pile on the desk in front of him, was no proof of innate viciousness of
disposition, but it prejudiced the Old Etonian against him. It was part
of Psmith's philosophy that a man who wore detachable cuffs had passed
beyond the limit of human toleration. In addition, Bristow wore a small
black moustache and a ring and that, as Psmith informed Mike, put the
lid on it.

Mike would sometimes stroll round to the Postage Department to listen
to the conversations between the two. Bristow was always friendliness
itself. He habitually addressed Psmith as Smithy, a fact which
entertained Mike greatly but did not seem to amuse Psmith to any
overwhelming extent. On the other hand, when, as he generally did, he
called Mike 'Mister Cricketer', the humour of the thing appeared to
elude Mike, though the mode of address always drew from Psmith a pale,
wan smile, as of a broken heart made cheerful against its own
inclination.

The net result of the coming of Bristow was that Psmith spent most of
his time, when not actually oppressed by a rush of work, in the
precincts of the Cash Department, talking to Mike and Mr Waller. The
latter did not seem to share the dislike common among the other heads
of departments of seeing his subordinates receiving visitors. Unless
the work was really heavy, in which case a mild remonstrance escaped
him, he offered no objection to Mike being at home to Psmith. It was
this tolerance which sometimes got him into trouble with Mr
Bickersdyke. The manager did not often perambulate the office, but he
did occasionally, and the interview which ensued upon his finding
Hutchinson, the underling in the Cash Department at that time, with his
stool tilted comfortably against the wall, reading the sporting news
from a pink paper to a friend from the Outward Bills Department who lay
luxuriously on the floor beside him, did not rank among Mr Waller's
pleasantest memories. But Mr Waller was too soft-hearted to interfere
with his assistants unless it was absolutely necessary. The truth of
the matter was that the New Asiatic Bank was over-staffed. There were
too many men for the work. The London branch of the bank was really
only a nursery. New men were constantly wanted in the Eastern branches,
so they had to be put into the London branch to learn the business,
whether there was any work for them to do or not.

It was after one of these visits of Psmith's that Mr Waller displayed a
new and unsuspected side to his character. Psmith had come round in a
state of some depression to discuss Bristow, as usual. Bristow, it
seemed, had come to the bank that morning in a fancy waistcoat of so
emphatic a colour-scheme that Psmith stoutly refused to sit in the same
department with it.

'What with Comrades Bristow and Bickersdyke combined,' said Psmith
plaintively, 'the work is becoming too hard for me. The whisper is
beginning to circulate, "Psmith's number is up--As a reformer he is
merely among those present. He is losing his dash." But what can I do?
I cannot keep an eye on both of them at the same time. The moment I
concentrate myself on Comrade Bickersdyke for a brief spell, and seem
to be doing him a bit of good, what happens? Why, Comrade Bristow
sneaks off and buys a sort of woollen sunset. I saw the thing
unexpectedly. I tell you I was shaken. It is the suddenness of that
waistcoat which hits you. It's discouraging, this sort of thing. I try
always to think well of my fellow man. As an energetic Socialist, I do
my best to see the good that is in him, but it's hard. Comrade
Bristow's the most striking argument against the equality of man I've
ever come across.'

Mr Waller intervened at this point.

'I think you must really let Jackson go on with his work, Smith,' he
said. 'There seems to be too much talking.'

'My besetting sin,' said Psmith sadly. 'Well, well, I will go back and
do my best to face it, but it's a tough job.'

He tottered wearily away in the direction of the Postage Department.

'Oh, Jackson,' said Mr Waller, 'will you kindly take my place for a few
minutes? I must go round and see the Inward Bills about something. I
shall be back very soon.'

Mike was becoming accustomed to deputizing for the cashier for short
spaces of time. It generally happened that he had to do so once or
twice a day. Strictly speaking, perhaps, Mr Waller was wrong to leave
such an important task as the actual cashing of cheques to an
inexperienced person of Mike's standing; but the New Asiatic Bank
differed from most banks in that there was not a great deal of
cross-counter work. People came in fairly frequently to cash cheques
of two or three pounds, but it was rare that any very large dealings
took place.

Having completed his business with the Inward Bills, Mr Waller made his
way back by a circuitous route, taking in the Postage desk.

He found Psmith with a pale, set face, inscribing figures in a ledger.
The Old Etonian greeted him with the faint smile of a persecuted saint
who is determined to be cheerful even at the stake.

'Comrade Bristow,' he said.

'Hullo, Smithy?' said the other, turning.

Psmith sadly directed Mr Waller's attention to the waistcoat, which was
certainly definite in its colouring.

'Nothing,' said Psmith. 'I only wanted to look at you.'

'Funny ass,' said Bristow, resuming his work. Psmith glanced at Mr
Waller, as who should say, 'See what I have to put up with. And yet I
do not give way.'

'Oh--er--Smith,' said Mr Waller, 'when you were talking to Jackson just
now--'

'Say no more,' said Psmith. 'It shall not occur again. Why should I
dislocate the work of your department in my efforts to win a
sympathetic word? I will bear Comrade Bristow like a man here. After
all, there are worse things at the Zoo.'

'No, no,' said Mr Waller hastily, 'I did not mean that. By all means
pay us a visit now and then, if it does not interfere with your own
work. But I noticed just now that you spoke to Bristow as Comrade
Bristow.'

'It is too true,' said Psmith. 'I must correct myself of the habit. He
will be getting above himself.'

'And when you were speaking to Jackson, you spoke of yourself as a
Socialist.'

'Socialism is the passion of my life,' said Psmith.

Mr Waller's face grew animated. He stammered in his eagerness.

'I am delighted,' he said. 'Really, I am delighted. I also--'

'A fellow worker in the Cause?' said Psmith.

'Er--exactly.'

Psmith extended his hand gravely. Mr Waller shook it with enthusiasm.

'I have never liked to speak of it to anybody in the office,' said Mr
Waller, 'but I, too, am heart and soul in the movement.'

'Yours for the Revolution?' said Psmith.

'Just so. Just so. Exactly. I was wondering--the fact is, I am in the
habit of speaking on Sundays in the open air, and--'

'Hyde Park?'

'No. No. Clapham Common. It is--er--handier for me where I live. Now,
as you are interested in the movement, I was thinking that perhaps you
might care to come and hear me speak next Sunday. Of course, if you
have nothing better to do.'

'I should like to excessively,' said Psmith.

'Excellent. Bring Jackson with you, and both of you come to supper
afterwards, if you will.'

'Thanks very much.'

'Perhaps you would speak yourself?'

'No,' said Psmith. 'No. I think not. My Socialism is rather of the
practical sort. I seldom speak. But it would be a treat to listen to
you. What--er--what type of oratory is yours?'

'Oh, well,' said Mr Waller, pulling nervously at his beard, 'of course
I--. Well, I am perhaps a little bitter--'

'Yes, yes.'

'A little mordant and ironical.'

'You would be,' agreed Psmith. 'I shall look forward to Sunday with
every fibre quivering. And Comrade Jackson shall be at my side.'

'Excellent,' said Mr Waller. 'I will go and tell him now.'


15. Stirring Times on the Common


'The first thing to do,' said Psmith, 'is to ascertain that such a
place as Clapham Common really exists. One has heard of it, of course,
but has its existence ever been proved? I think not. Having
accomplished that, we must then try to find out how to get to it. I
should say at a venture that it would necessitate a sea-voyage. On the
other hand, Comrade Waller, who is a native of the spot, seems to find
no difficulty in rolling to the office every morning. Therefore--you
follow me, Jackson?--it must be in England. In that case, we will take
a taximeter cab, and go out into the unknown, hand in hand, trusting to
luck.'

'I expect you could get there by tram,' said Mike.

Psmith suppressed a slight shudder.

'I fear, Comrade Jackson,' he said, 'that the old noblesse oblige
traditions of the Psmiths would not allow me to do that. No. We will
stroll gently, after a light lunch, to Trafalgar Square, and hail a
taxi.'

'Beastly expensive.'

'But with what an object! Can any expenditure be called excessive which
enables us to hear Comrade Waller being mordant and ironical at the
other end?'

'It's a rum business,' said Mike. 'I hope the dickens he won't mix us
up in it. We should look frightful fools.'

'I may possibly say a few words,' said Psmith carelessly, 'if the
spirit moves me. Who am I that I should deny people a simple pleasure?'

Mike looked alarmed.

'Look here,' he said, 'I say, if you _are_ going to play the goat,
for goodness' sake don't go lugging me into it. I've got heaps of
troubles without that.'

Psmith waved the objection aside.

'You,' he said, 'will be one of the large, and, I hope, interested
audience. Nothing more. But it is quite possible that the spirit may
not move me. I may not feel inspired to speak. I am not one of those
who love speaking for speaking's sake. If I have no message for the
many-headed, I shall remain silent.'

'Then I hope the dickens you won't have,' said Mike. Of all things he
hated most being conspicuous before a crowd--except at cricket, which
was a different thing--and he had an uneasy feeling that Psmith would
rather like it than otherwise.

'We shall see,' said Psmith absently. 'Of course, if in the vein, I
might do something big in the way of oratory. I am a plain, blunt man,
but I feel convinced that, given the opportunity, I should haul up my
slacks to some effect. But--well, we shall see. We shall see.'

And with this ghastly state of doubt Mike had to be content.

It was with feelings of apprehension that he accompanied Psmith from
the flat to Trafalgar Square in search of a cab which should convey
them to Clapham Common.

They were to meet Mr Waller at the edge of the Common nearest the
old town of Clapham. On the journey down Psmith was inclined to be
_debonnaire_. Mike, on the other hand, was silent and apprehensive.
He knew enough of Psmith to know that, if half an opportunity were
offered him, he would extract entertainment from this affair after
his own fashion; and then the odds were that he himself would be
dragged into it. Perhaps--his scalp bristled at the mere idea--he
would even be let in for a speech.

This grisly thought had hardly come into his head, when Psmith spoke.

'I'm not half sure,' he said thoughtfully, 'I sha'n't call on you for a
speech, Comrade Jackson.'

'Look here, Psmith--' began Mike agitatedly.

'I don't know. I think your solid, incisive style would rather go down
with the masses. However, we shall see, we shall see.'

Mike reached the Common in a state of nervous collapse.

Mr Waller was waiting for them by the railings near the pond. The
apostle of the Revolution was clad soberly in black, except for a tie
of vivid crimson. His eyes shone with the light of enthusiasm, vastly
different from the mild glow of amiability which they exhibited for six
days in every week. The man was transformed.

'Here you are,' he said. 'Here you are. Excellent. You are in good
time. Comrades Wotherspoon and Prebble have already begun to speak. I
shall commence now that you have come. This is the way. Over by these
trees.'

They made their way towards a small clump of trees, near which a
fair-sized crowd had already begun to collect. Evidently listening
to the speakers was one of Clapham's fashionable Sunday amusements. Mr
Waller talked and gesticulated incessantly as he walked. Psmith's
demeanour was perhaps a shade patronizing, but he displayed interest.
Mike proceeded to the meeting with the air of an about-to-be-washed dog.
He was loathing the whole business with a heartiness worthy of a better
cause. Somehow, he felt he was going to be made to look a fool before
the afternoon was over. But he registered a vow that nothing should
drag him on to the small platform which had been erected for the
benefit of the speaker.

As they drew nearer, the voices of Comrades Wotherspoon and Prebble
became more audible. They had been audible all the time, very much so,
but now they grew in volume. Comrade Wotherspoon was a tall, thin man
with side-whiskers and a high voice. He scattered his aitches as a
fountain its sprays in a strong wind. He was very earnest. Comrade
Prebble was earnest, too. Perhaps even more so than Comrade
Wotherspoon. He was handicapped to some extent, however, by not having
a palate. This gave to his profoundest thoughts a certain weirdness, as
if they had been uttered in an unknown tongue. The crowd was thickest
round his platform. The grown-up section plainly regarded him as a
comedian, pure and simple, and roared with happy laughter when he urged
them to march upon Park Lane and loot the same without mercy or
scruple. The children were more doubtful. Several had broken down, and
been led away in tears.

When Mr Waller got up to speak on platform number three, his audience
consisted at first only of Psmith, Mike, and a fox-terrier. Gradually
however, he attracted others. After wavering for a while, the crowd
finally decided that he was worth hearing. He had a method of his own.
Lacking the natural gifts which marked Comrade Prebble out as an
entertainer, he made up for this by his activity. Where his colleagues
stood comparatively still, Mr Waller behaved with the vivacity
generally supposed to belong only to peas on shovels and cats on hot
bricks. He crouched to denounce the House of Lords. He bounded from
side to side while dissecting the methods of the plutocrats. During an
impassioned onslaught on the monarchical system he stood on one leg and
hopped. This was more the sort of thing the crowd had come to see.
Comrade Wotherspoon found himself deserted, and even Comrade Prebble's
shortcomings in the way of palate were insufficient to keep his flock
together. The entire strength of the audience gathered in front of the
third platform.

Mike, separated from Psmith by the movement of the crowd, listened with
a growing depression. That feeling which attacks a sensitive person
sometimes at the theatre when somebody is making himself ridiculous on
the stage--the illogical feeling that it is he and not the actor who is
floundering--had come over him in a wave. He liked Mr Waller, and it
made his gorge rise to see him exposing himself to the jeers of a
crowd. The fact that Mr Waller himself did not know that they were
jeers, but mistook them for applause, made it no better. Mike felt
vaguely furious.

His indignation began to take a more personal shape when the speaker,
branching off from the main subject of Socialism, began to touch on
temperance. There was no particular reason why Mr Waller should have
introduced the subject of temperance, except that he happened to be an
enthusiast. He linked it on to his remarks on Socialism by attributing
the lethargy of the masses to their fondness for alcohol; and the
crowd, which had been inclined rather to pat itself on the back during
the assaults on Rank and Property, finding itself assailed in its turn,
resented it. They were there to listen to speakers telling them that
they were the finest fellows on earth, not pointing out their little
failings to them. The feeling of the meeting became hostile. The jeers
grew more frequent and less good-tempered.

'Comrade Waller means well,' said a voice in Mike's ear, 'but if he
shoots it at them like this much more there'll be a bit of an
imbroglio.'

'Look here, Smith,' said Mike quickly, 'can't we stop him? These chaps
are getting fed up, and they look bargees enough to do anything.
They'll be going for him or something soon.'

'How can we switch off the flow? I don't see. The man is wound up. He
means to get it off his chest if it snows. I feel we are by way of
being in the soup once more, Comrade Jackson. We can only sit tight and
look on.'

The crowd was becoming more threatening every minute. A group of young
men of the loafer class who stood near Mike were especially fertile in
comment. Psmith's eyes were on the speaker; but Mike was watching this
group closely. Suddenly he saw one of them, a thick-set youth wearing a
cloth cap and no collar, stoop.

When he rose again there was a stone in his hand.

The sight acted on Mike like a spur. Vague rage against nobody in
particular had been simmering in him for half an hour. Now it
concentrated itself on the cloth-capped one.

Mr Waller paused momentarily before renewing his harangue. The man in
the cloth cap raised his hand. There was a swirl in the crowd, and the
first thing that Psmith saw as he turned was Mike seizing the would-be
marksman round the neck and hurling him to the ground, after the manner
of a forward at football tackling an opponent during a line-out from
touch.

There is one thing which will always distract the attention of a crowd
from any speaker, and that is a dispute between two of its units. Mr
Waller's views on temperance were forgotten in an instant. The audience
surged round Mike and his opponent.

The latter had scrambled to his feet now, and was looking round for his
assailant.

'That's 'im, Bill!' cried eager voices, indicating Mike.

''E's the bloke wot 'it yer, Bill,' said others, more precise in
detail.

Bill advanced on Mike in a sidelong, crab-like manner.

''Oo're you, I should like to know?' said Bill.

Mike, rightly holding that this was merely a rhetorical question and
that Bill had no real thirst for information as to his family history,
made no reply. Or, rather, the reply he made was not verbal. He waited
till his questioner was within range, and then hit him in the eye. A
reply far more satisfactory, if not to Bill himself, at any rate to the
interested onlookers, than any flow of words.

A contented sigh went up from the crowd. Their Sunday afternoon was
going to be spent just as they considered Sunday afternoons should be
spent.

'Give us your coat,' said Psmith briskly, 'and try and get it over
quick. Don't go in for any fancy sparring. Switch it on, all you know,
from the start. I'll keep a thoughtful eye open to see that none of his
friends and relations join in.'

Outwardly Psmith was unruffled, but inwardly he was not feeling so
composed. An ordinary turn-up before an impartial crowd which could be
relied upon to preserve the etiquette of these matters was one thing.
As regards the actual little dispute with the cloth-capped Bill, he
felt that he could rely on Mike to handle it satisfactorily. But there
was no knowing how long the crowd would be content to remain mere
spectators. There was no doubt which way its sympathies lay. Bill, now
stripped of his coat and sketching out in a hoarse voice a scenario of
what he intended to do--knocking Mike down and stamping him into the
mud was one of the milder feats he promised to perform for the
entertainment of an indulgent audience--was plainly the popular
favourite.

Psmith, though he did not show it, was more than a little apprehensive.

Mike, having more to occupy his mind in the immediate present, was not
anxious concerning the future. He had the great advantage over Psmith
of having lost his temper. Psmith could look on the situation as a
whole, and count the risks and possibilities. Mike could only see Bill
shuffling towards him with his head down and shoulders bunched.

'Gow it, Bill!' said someone.

'Pliy up, the Arsenal!' urged a voice on the outskirts of the crowd.

A chorus of encouragement from kind friends in front: 'Step up, Bill!'

And Bill stepped.


16. Further Developments


Bill (surname unknown) was not one of your ultra-scientific fighters.
He did not favour the American crouch and the artistic feint. He had a
style wholly his own. It seemed to have been modelled partly on a
tortoise and partly on a windmill. His head he appeared to be trying to
conceal between his shoulders, and he whirled his arms alternately in
circular sweeps.

Mike, on the other hand, stood upright and hit straight, with the
result that he hurt his knuckles very much on his opponent's skull,
without seeming to disturb the latter to any great extent. In the
process he received one of the windmill swings on the left ear. The
crowd, strong pro-Billites, raised a cheer.

This maddened Mike. He assumed the offensive. Bill, satisfied for the
moment with his success, had stepped back, and was indulging in some
fancy sparring, when Mike sprang upon him like a panther. They
clinched, and Mike, who had got the under grip, hurled Bill forcibly
against a stout man who looked like a publican. The two fell in a heap,
Bill underneath.

At the same time Bill's friends joined in.

The first intimation Mike had of this was a violent blow across the
shoulders with a walking-stick. Even if he had been wearing his
overcoat, the blow would have hurt. As he was in his jacket it hurt
more than anything he had ever experienced in his life. He leapt up
with a yell, but Psmith was there before him. Mike saw his assailant
lift the stick again, and then collapse as the old Etonian's right took
him under the chin.

He darted to Psmith's side.

'This is no place for us,' observed the latter sadly. 'Shift ho, I
think. Come on.'

They dashed simultaneously for the spot where the crowd was thinnest.
The ring which had formed round Mike and Bill had broken up as the
result of the intervention of Bill's allies, and at the spot for which
they ran only two men were standing. And these had apparently made up
their minds that neutrality was the best policy, for they made no
movement to stop them. Psmith and Mike charged through the gap, and
raced for the road.

The suddenness of the move gave them just the start they needed. Mike
looked over his shoulder. The crowd, to a man, seemed to be following.
Bill, excavated from beneath the publican, led the field. Lying a good
second came a band of three, and after them the rest in a bunch.

They reached the road in this order.

Some fifty yards down the road was a stationary tram. In the ordinary
course of things it would probably have moved on long before Psmith and
Mike could have got to it; but the conductor, a man with sporting blood
in him, seeing what appeared to be the finish of some Marathon Race,
refrained from giving the signal, and moved out into the road to
observe events more clearly, at the same time calling to the driver,
who joined him. Passengers on the roof stood up to get a good view.
There was some cheering.

Psmith and Mike reached the tram ten yards to the good; and, if it had
been ready to start then, all would have been well. But Bill and his
friends had arrived while the driver and conductor were both out in the
road.

The affair now began to resemble the doings of Horatius on the bridge.
Psmith and Mike turned to bay on the platform at the foot of the tram
steps. Bill, leading by three yards, sprang on to it, grabbed Mike, and
fell with him on to the road. Psmith, descending with a dignity
somewhat lessened by the fact that his hat was on the side of his head,
was in time to engage the runners-up.

Psmith, as pugilist, lacked something of the calm majesty which
characterized him in the more peaceful moments of life, but he was
undoubtedly effective. Nature had given him an enormous reach and a
lightness on his feet remarkable in one of his size; and at some time
in his career he appeared to have learned how to use his hands. The
first of the three runners, the walking-stick manipulator, had the
misfortune to charge straight into the old Etonian's left. It was a
well-timed blow, and the force of it, added to the speed at which the
victim was running, sent him on to the pavement, where he spun round
and sat down. In the subsequent proceedings he took no part.

The other two attacked Psmith simultaneously, one on each side. In
doing so, the one on the left tripped over Mike and Bill, who were
still in the process of sorting themselves out, and fell, leaving
Psmith free to attend to the other. He was a tall, weedy youth. His
conspicuous features were a long nose and a light yellow waistcoat.
Psmith hit him on the former with his left and on the latter with his
right. The long youth emitted a gurgle, and collided with Bill, who had
wrenched himself free from Mike and staggered to his feet. Bill, having
received a second blow in the eye during the course of his interview on
the road with Mike, was not feeling himself. Mistaking the other for an
enemy, he proceeded to smite him in the parts about the jaw. He had
just upset him, when a stern official voice observed, ''Ere, now,
what's all this?'

There is no more unfailing corrective to a scene of strife than the
'What's all this?' of the London policeman. Bill abandoned his
intention of stamping on the prostrate one, and the latter, sitting up,
blinked and was silent.

'What's all this?' asked the policeman again. Psmith, adjusting his hat
at the correct angle again, undertook the explanations.

'A distressing scene, officer,' he said. 'A case of that unbridled
brawling which is, alas, but too common in our London streets. These
two, possibly till now the closest friends, fall out over some point,
probably of the most trivial nature, and what happens? They brawl.
They--'

'He 'it me,' said the long youth, dabbing at his face with a
handkerchief and pointing an accusing finger at Psmith, who regarded
him through his eyeglass with a look in which pity and censure were
nicely blended.

Bill, meanwhile, circling round restlessly, in the apparent hope of
getting past the Law and having another encounter with Mike, expressed
himself in a stream of language which drew stern reproof from the
shocked constable.

'You 'op it,' concluded the man in blue. 'That's what you do. You 'op
it.'

'I should,' said Psmith kindly. 'The officer is speaking in your best
interests. A man of taste and discernment, he knows what is best. His
advice is good, and should be followed.'

The constable seemed to notice Psmith for the first time. He turned and
stared at him. Psmith's praise had not had the effect of softening him.
His look was one of suspicion.

'And what might _you_ have been up to?' he inquired coldly. 'This
man says you hit him.'

Psmith waved the matter aside.

'Purely in self-defence,' he said, 'purely in self-defence. What else
could the man of spirit do? A mere tap to discourage an aggressive
movement.'

The policeman stood silent, weighing matters in the balance. He
produced a notebook and sucked his pencil. Then he called the conductor
of the tram as a witness.

'A brainy and admirable step,' said Psmith, approvingly. 'This rugged,
honest man, all unused to verbal subtleties, shall give us his plain
account of what happened. After which, as I presume this tram--little
as I know of the habits of trams--has got to go somewhere today, I
would suggest that we all separated and moved on.'

He took two half-crowns from his pocket, and began to clink them
meditatively together. A slight softening of the frigidity of the
constable's manner became noticeable. There was a milder beam in the
eyes which gazed into Psmith's.

Nor did the conductor seem altogether uninfluenced by the sight.

The conductor deposed that he had bin on the point of pushing on,
seeing as how he'd hung abart long enough, when he see'd them two
gents, the long 'un with the heye-glass (Psmith bowed) and t'other 'un,
a-legging of it dahn the road towards him, with the other blokes
pelting after 'em. He added that, when they reached the trem, the two
gents had got aboard, and was then set upon by the blokes. And after
that, he concluded, well, there was a bit of a scrap, and that's how it
was.

'Lucidly and excellently put,' said Psmith. 'That is just how it was.
Comrade Jackson, I fancy we leave the court without a stain on our
characters. We win through. Er--constable, we have given you a great
deal of trouble. Possibly--?'

'Thank you, sir.' There was a musical clinking. 'Now then, all of you,
you 'op it. You're all bin poking your noses in 'ere long enough. Pop
off. Get on with that tram, conductor.' Psmith and Mike settled
themselves in a seat on the roof. When the conductor came along, Psmith
gave him half a crown, and asked after his wife and the little ones at
home. The conductor thanked goodness that he was a bachelor, punched
the tickets, and retired.

'Subject for a historical picture,' said Psmith. 'Wounded leaving the
field after the Battle of Clapham Common. How are your injuries,
Comrade Jackson?'

'My back's hurting like blazes,' said Mike. 'And my ear's all sore
where that chap got me. Anything the matter with you?'

'Physically,' said Psmith, 'no. Spiritually much. Do you realize,
Comrade Jackson, the thing that has happened? I am riding in a tram. I,
Psmith, have paid a penny for a ticket on a tram. If this should get
about the clubs! I tell you, Comrade Jackson, no such crisis has ever
occurred before in the course of my career.'

'You can always get off, you know,' said Mike.

'He thinks of everything,' said Psmith, admiringly. 'You have touched
the spot with an unerring finger. Let us descend. I observe in the
distance a cab. That looks to me more the sort of thing we want. Let us
go and parley with the driver.'


17. Sunday Supper


The cab took them back to the flat, at considerable expense, and Psmith
requested Mike to make tea, a performance in which he himself was
interested purely as a spectator. He had views on the subject of
tea-making which he liked to expound from an armchair or sofa, but he
never got further than this. Mike, his back throbbing dully from the
blow he had received, and feeling more than a little sore all over,
prepared the Etna, fetched the milk, and finally produced the finished
article.

Psmith sipped meditatively.

'How pleasant,' he said, 'after strife is rest. We shouldn't have
appreciated this simple cup of tea had our sensibilities remained
unstirred this afternoon. We can now sit at our ease, like warriors
after the fray, till the time comes for setting out to Comrade Waller's
once more.'

Mike looked up.

'What! You don't mean to say you're going to sweat out to Clapham
again?'

'Undoubtedly. Comrade Waller is expecting us to supper.'

'What absolute rot! We can't fag back there.'

'Noblesse oblige. The cry has gone round the Waller household, "Jackson
and Psmith are coming to supper," and we cannot disappoint them now.
Already the fatted blanc-mange has been killed, and the table creaks
beneath what's left of the midday beef. We must be there; besides,
don't you want to see how the poor man is? Probably we shall find him
in the act of emitting his last breath. I expect he was lynched by the
enthusiastic mob.'

'Not much,' grinned Mike. 'They were too busy with us. All right, I'll
come if you really want me to, but it's awful rot.'

One of the many things Mike could never understand in Psmith was his
fondness for getting into atmospheres that were not his own. He would
go out of his way to do this. Mike, like most boys of his age, was
never really happy and at his ease except in the presence of those of
his own years and class. Psmith, on the contrary, seemed to be bored by
them, and infinitely preferred talking to somebody who lived in quite
another world. Mike was not a snob. He simply had not the ability to be
at his ease with people in another class from his own. He did not know
what to talk to them about, unless they were cricket professionals.
With them he was never at a loss.

But Psmith was different. He could get on with anyone. He seemed to
have the gift of entering into their minds and seeing things from their
point of view.

As regarded Mr Waller, Mike liked him personally, and was prepared, as
we have seen, to undertake considerable risks in his defence; but he
loathed with all his heart and soul the idea of supper at his house. He
knew that he would have nothing to say. Whereas Psmith gave him the
impression of looking forward to the thing as a treat.

       *       *       *       *       *

The house where Mr Waller lived was one of a row of semi-detached
villas on the north side of the Common. The door was opened to them by
their host himself. So far from looking battered and emitting last
breaths, he appeared particularly spruce. He had just returned from
Church, and was still wearing his gloves and tall hat. He squeaked with
surprise when he saw who were standing on the mat.

'Why, dear me, dear me,' he said. 'Here you are! I have been wondering
what had happened to you. I was afraid that you might have been
seriously hurt. I was afraid those ruffians might have injured you.
When last I saw you, you were being--'

'Chivvied,' interposed Psmith, with dignified melancholy. 'Do not let
us try to wrap the fact up in pleasant words. We were being chivvied.
We were legging it with the infuriated mob at our heels. An ignominious
position for a Shropshire Psmith, but, after all, Napoleon did the
same.'

'But what happened? I could not see. I only know that quite suddenly
the people seemed to stop listening to me, and all gathered round you
and Jackson. And then I saw that Jackson was engaged in a fight with a
young man.'

'Comrade Jackson, I imagine, having heard a great deal about all men
being equal, was anxious to test the theory, and see whether Comrade
Bill was as good a man as he was. The experiment was broken off
prematurely, but I personally should be inclined to say that Comrade
Jackson had a shade the better of the exchanges.'

Mr Waller looked with interest at Mike, who shuffled and felt awkward.
He was hoping that Psmith would say nothing about the reason of his
engaging Bill in combat. He had an uneasy feeling that Mr Waller's
gratitude would be effusive and overpowering, and he did not wish to
pose as the brave young hero. There are moments when one does not feel
equal to the _role_.

Fortunately, before Mr Waller had time to ask any further questions,
the supper-bell sounded, and they went into the dining-room.

Sunday supper, unless done on a large and informal scale, is probably
the most depressing meal in existence. There is a chill discomfort in
the round of beef, an icy severity about the open jam tart. The
blancmange shivers miserably.

Spirituous liquor helps to counteract the influence of these things,
and so does exhilarating conversation. Unfortunately, at Mr Waller's
table there was neither. The cashier's views on temperance were not
merely for the platform; they extended to the home. And the company was
not of the exhilarating sort. Besides Psmith and Mike and their host,
there were four people present--Comrade Prebble, the orator; a young
man of the name of Richards; Mr Waller's niece, answering to the name
of Ada, who was engaged to Mr Richards; and Edward.

Edward was Mr Waller's son. He was ten years old, wore a very tight
Eton suit, and had the peculiarly loathsome expression which a snub
nose sometimes gives to the young.

It would have been plain to the most casual observer that Mr Waller was
fond and proud of his son. The cashier was a widower, and after five
minutes' acquaintance with Edward, Mike felt strongly that Mrs Waller
was the lucky one. Edward sat next to Mike, and showed a tendency to
concentrate his conversation on him. Psmith, at the opposite end of the
table, beamed in a fatherly manner upon the pair through his eyeglass.

Mike got on with small girls reasonably well. He preferred them at a
distance, but, if cornered by them, could put up a fairly good show.
Small boys, however, filled him with a sort of frozen horror. It was
his view that a boy should not be exhibited publicly until he reached
an age when he might be in the running for some sort of colours at a
public school.

Edward was one of those well-informed small boys. He opened on Mike
with the first mouthful.

'Do you know the principal exports of Marseilles?' he inquired.

'What?' said Mike coldly.

'Do you know the principal exports of Marseilles? I do.'

'Oh?' said Mike.

'Yes. Do you know the capital of Madagascar?'

Mike, as crimson as the beef he was attacking, said he did not.

'I do.'

'Oh?' said Mike.

'Who was the first king--'

'You mustn't worry Mr Jackson, Teddy,' said Mr Waller, with a touch of
pride in his voice, as who should say 'There are not many boys of his
age, I can tell you, who _could_ worry you with questions like
that.'

'No, no, he likes it,' said Psmith, unnecessarily. 'He likes it. I
always hold that much may be learned by casual chit-chat across the
dinner-table. I owe much of my own grasp of--'

'I bet _you_ don't know what's the capital of Madagascar,'
interrupted Mike rudely.

'I do,' said Edward. 'I can tell you the kings of Israel?' he added,
turning to Mike. He seemed to have no curiosity as to the extent of
Psmith's knowledge. Mike's appeared to fascinate him.

Mike helped himself to beetroot in moody silence.

His mouth was full when Comrade Prebble asked him a question. Comrade
Prebble, as has been pointed out in an earlier part of the narrative,
was a good chap, but had no roof to his mouth.

'I beg your pardon?' said Mike.

Comrade Prebble repeated his observation. Mike looked helplessly at
Psmith, but Psmith's eyes were on his plate.

Mike felt he must venture on some answer.

'No,' he said decidedly.

Comrade Prebble seemed slightly taken aback. There was an awkward
pause. Then Mr Waller, for whom his fellow Socialist's methods of
conversation held no mysteries, interpreted.

'The mustard, Prebble? Yes, yes. Would you mind passing Prebble the
mustard, Mr Jackson?'

'Oh, sorry,' gasped Mike, and, reaching out, upset the water-jug into
the open jam-tart.

Through the black mist which rose before his eyes as he leaped to his
feet and stammered apologies came the dispassionate voice of Master
Edward Waller reminding him that mustard was first introduced into Peru
by Cortez.

His host was all courtesy and consideration. He passed the matter off
genially. But life can never be quite the same after you have upset a
water-jug into an open jam-tart at the table of a comparative stranger.
Mike's nerve had gone. He ate on, but he was a broken man.

At the other end of the table it became gradually apparent that things
were not going on altogether as they should have done. There was a sort
of bleakness in the atmosphere. Young Mr Richards was looking like a
stuffed fish, and the face of Mr Waller's niece was cold and set.

'Why, come, come, Ada,' said Mr Waller, breezily, 'what's the matter?
You're eating nothing. What's George been saying to you?' he added
jocularly.

'Thank you, uncle Robert,' replied Ada precisely, 'there's nothing the
matter. Nothing that Mr Richards can say to me can upset me.'

'Mr Richards!' echoed Mr Waller in astonishment. How was he to know
that, during the walk back from church, the world had been transformed,
George had become Mr Richards, and all was over?

'I assure you, Ada--' began that unfortunate young man. Ada turned a
frigid shoulder towards him.

'Come, come,' said Mr Waller disturbed. 'What's all this? What's all
this?'

His niece burst into tears and left the room.

If there is anything more embarrassing to a guest than a family row, we
have yet to hear of it. Mike, scarlet to the extreme edges of his ears,
concentrated himself on his plate. Comrade Prebble made a great many
remarks, which were probably illuminating, if they could have been
understood. Mr Waller looked, astonished, at Mr Richards. Mr Richards,
pink but dogged, loosened his collar, but said nothing. Psmith, leaning
forward, asked Master Edward Waller his opinion on the Licensing Bill.

'We happened to have a word or two,' said Mr Richards at length, 'on
the way home from church on the subject of Women's Suffrage.'

'That fatal topic!' murmured Psmith.

'In Australia--' began Master Edward Waller.

'I was rayther--well, rayther facetious about it,' continued Mr
Richards.

Psmith clicked his tongue sympathetically.

'In Australia--' said Edward.

'I went talking on, laughing and joking, when all of a sudden she flew
out at me. How was I to know she was 'eart and soul in the movement?
You never told me,' he added accusingly to his host.

'In Australia--' said Edward.

'I'll go and try and get her round. How was I to know?'

Mr Richards thrust back his chair and bounded from the room.

'Now, iawinyaw, iear oiler--' said Comrade Prebble judicially, but was
interrupted.

'How very disturbing!' said Mr Waller. 'I am so sorry that this should
have happened. Ada is such a touchy, sensitive girl. She--'

'In Australia,' said Edward in even tones, 'they've _got_ Women's
Suffrage already. Did _you_ know that?' he said to Mike.

Mike made no answer. His eyes were fixed on his plate. A bead of
perspiration began to roll down his forehead. If his feelings could
have been ascertained at that moment, they would have been summed up in
the words, 'Death, where is thy sting?'


18. Psmith Makes a Discovery


'Women,' said Psmith, helping himself to trifle, and speaking with the
air of one launched upon his special subject, 'are, one must recollect,
like--like--er, well, in fact, just so. Passing on lightly from that
conclusion, let us turn for a moment to the Rights of Property, in
connection with which Comrade Prebble and yourself had so much that was
interesting to say this afternoon. Perhaps you'--he bowed in Comrade
Prebble's direction--'would resume, for the benefit of Comrade Jackson--a
novice in the Cause, but earnest--your very lucid--'

Comrade Prebble beamed, and took the floor. Mike began to realize that,
till now, he had never known what boredom meant. There had been moments
in his life which had been less interesting than other moments, but
nothing to touch this for agony. Comrade Prebble's address streamed on
like water rushing over a weir. Every now and then there was a word or
two which was recognizable, but this happened so rarely that it
amounted to little. Sometimes Mr Waller would interject a remark, but
not often. He seemed to be of the opinion that Comrade Prebble's was
the master mind and that to add anything to his views would be in the
nature of painting the lily and gilding the refined gold. Mike himself
said nothing. Psmith and Edward were equally silent. The former sat
like one in a trance, thinking his own thoughts, while Edward, who,
prospecting on the sideboard, had located a rich biscuit-mine, was too
occupied for speech.

After about twenty minutes, during which Mike's discomfort changed to a
dull resignation, Mr Waller suggested a move to the drawing-room, where
Ada, he said, would play some hymns.

The prospect did not dazzle Mike, but any change, he thought, must be
for the better. He had sat staring at the ruin of the blancmange so
long that it had begun to hypnotize him. Also, the move had the
excellent result of eliminating the snub-nosed Edward, who was sent to
bed. His last words were in the form of a question, addressed to Mike,
on the subject of the hypotenuse and the square upon the same.

'A remarkably intelligent boy,' said Psmith. 'You must let him come to
tea at our flat one day. I may not be in myself--I have many duties
which keep me away--but Comrade Jackson is sure to be there, and will
be delighted to chat with him.'

On the way upstairs Mike tried to get Psmith to himself for a moment to
suggest the advisability of an early departure; but Psmith was in close
conversation with his host. Mike was left to Comrade Prebble, who,
apparently, had only touched the fringe of his subject in his lecture
in the dining-room.

When Mr Waller had predicted hymns in the drawing-room, he had been too
sanguine (or too pessimistic). Of Ada, when they arrived, there were no
signs. It seemed that she had gone straight to bed. Young Mr Richards
was sitting on the sofa, moodily turning the leaves of a photograph
album, which contained portraits of Master Edward Waller in
geometrically progressing degrees of repulsiveness--here, in frocks,
looking like a gargoyle; there, in sailor suit, looking like nothing on
earth. The inspection of these was obviously deepening Mr Richards'
gloom, but he proceeded doggedly with it.

Comrade Prebble backed the reluctant Mike into a corner, and, like the
Ancient Mariner, held him with a glittering eye. Psmith and Mr Waller,
in the opposite corner, were looking at something with their heads
close together. Mike definitely abandoned all hope of a rescue from
Psmith, and tried to buoy himself up with the reflection that this
could not last for ever.

Hours seemed to pass, and then at last he heard Psmith's voice saying
good-bye to his host.

He sprang to his feet. Comrade Prebble was in the middle of a sentence,
but this was no time for polished courtesy. He felt that he must get
away, and at once. 'I fear,' Psmith was saying, 'that we must tear
ourselves away. We have greatly enjoyed our evening. You must look us
up at our flat one day, and bring Comrade Prebble. If I am not in,
Comrade Jackson is certain to be, and he will be more than delighted to
hear Comrade Prebble speak further on the subject of which he is such a
master.' Comrade Prebble was understood to say that he would certainly
come. Mr Waller beamed. Mr Richards, still steeped in gloom, shook
hands in silence.

Out in the road, with the front door shut behind them, Mike spoke his
mind.

'Look here, Smith,' he said definitely, 'if being your confidential
secretary and adviser is going to let me in for any more of that sort
of thing, you can jolly well accept my resignation.'

'The orgy was not to your taste?' said Psmith sympathetically.

Mike laughed. One of those short, hollow, bitter laughs.

'I am at a loss, Comrade Jackson,' said Psmith, 'to understand your
attitude. You fed sumptuously. You had fun with the crockery--that
knockabout act of yours with the water-jug was alone worth the
money--and you had the advantage of listening to the views of a
master of his subject. What more do you want?'

'What on earth did you land me with that man Prebble for?'

'Land you! Why, you courted his society. I had practically to drag you
away from him. When I got up to say good-bye, you were listening to him
with bulging eyes. I never saw such a picture of rapt attention. Do you
mean to tell me, Comrade Jackson, that your appearance belied you, that
you were not interested? Well, well. How we misread our fellow
creatures.'

'I think you might have come and lent a hand with Prebble. It was a bit
thick.'

'I was too absorbed with Comrade Waller. We were talking of things of
vital moment. However, the night is yet young. We will take this cab,
wend our way to the West, seek a cafe, and cheer ourselves with light
refreshments.'

Arrived at a cafe whose window appeared to be a sort of museum of every
kind of German sausage, they took possession of a vacant table and
ordered coffee. Mike soon found himself soothed by his bright
surroundings, and gradually his impressions of blancmange, Edward, and
Comrade Prebble faded from his mind. Psmith, meanwhile, was preserving
an unusual silence, being deep in a large square book of the sort in
which Press cuttings are pasted. As Psmith scanned its contents a
curious smile lit up his face. His reflections seemed to be of an
agreeable nature.

'Hullo,' said Mike, 'what have you got hold of there? Where did you get
that?'

'Comrade Waller very kindly lent it to me. He showed it to me after
supper, knowing how enthusiastically I was attached to the Cause. Had
you been less tensely wrapped up in Comrade Prebble's conversation, I
would have desired you to step across and join us. However, you now
have your opportunity.'

'But what is it?' asked Mike.

'It is the record of the meetings of the Tulse Hill Parliament,' said
Psmith impressively. 'A faithful record of all they said, all the votes
of confidence they passed in the Government, and also all the nasty
knocks they gave it from time to time.'

'What on earth's the Tulse Hill Parliament?'

'It is, alas,' said Psmith in a grave, sad voice, 'no more. In life it
was beautiful, but now it has done the Tom Bowling act. It has gone
aloft. We are dealing, Comrade Jackson, not with the live, vivid
present, but with the far-off, rusty past. And yet, in a way, there is
a touch of the live, vivid present mixed up in it.'

'I don't know what the dickens you're talking about,' said Mike. 'Let's
have a look, anyway.'

Psmith handed him the volume, and, leaning back, sipped his coffee, and
watched him. At first Mike's face was bored and blank, but suddenly an
interested look came into it.

'Aha!' said Psmith.

'Who's Bickersdyke? Anything to do with our Bickersdyke?'

'No other than our genial friend himself.'

Mike turned the pages, reading a line or two on each.

'Hullo!' he said, chuckling. 'He lets himself go a bit, doesn't he!'

'He does,' acknowledged Psmith. 'A fiery, passionate nature, that of
Comrade Bickersdyke.'

'He's simply cursing the Government here. Giving them frightful beans.'

Psmith nodded.

'I noticed the fact myself.'

'But what's it all about?'

'As far as I can glean from Comrade Waller,' said Psmith, 'about twenty
years ago, when he and Comrade Bickersdyke worked hand-in-hand as
fellow clerks at the New Asiatic, they were both members of the Tulse
Hill Parliament, that powerful institution. At that time Comrade
Bickersdyke was as fruity a Socialist as Comrade Waller is now. Only,
apparently, as he began to get on a bit in the world, he altered his
views to some extent as regards the iniquity of freezing on to a decent
share of the doubloons. And that, you see, is where the dim and rusty
past begins to get mixed up with the live, vivid present. If any
tactless person were to publish those very able speeches made by
Comrade Bickersdyke when a bulwark of the Tulse Hill Parliament, our
revered chief would be more or less caught bending, if I may employ the
expression, as regards his chances of getting in as Unionist candidate
at Kenningford. You follow me, Watson? I rather fancy the light-hearted
electors of Kenningford, from what I have seen of their rather acute
sense of humour, would be, as it were, all over it. It would be very,
very trying for Comrade Bickersdyke if these speeches of his were to
get about.'

'You aren't going to--!'

'I shall do nothing rashly. I shall merely place this handsome volume
among my treasured books. I shall add it to my "Books that have helped
me" series. Because I fancy that, in an emergency, it may not be at all
a bad thing to have about me. And now,' he concluded, 'as the hour is
getting late, perhaps we had better be shoving off for home.'


19. The Illness of Edward


Life in a bank is at its pleasantest in the winter. When all the world
outside is dark and damp and cold, the light and warmth of the place
are comforting. There is a pleasant air of solidity about the interior
of a bank. The green shaded lamps look cosy. And, the outside world
offering so few attractions, the worker, perched on his stool, feels
that he is not so badly off after all. It is when the days are long and
the sun beats hot on the pavement, and everything shouts to him how
splendid it is out in the country, that he begins to grow restless.

Mike, except for a fortnight at the beginning of his career in the New
Asiatic Bank, had not had to stand the test of sunshine. At present,
the weather being cold and dismal, he was almost entirely contented.
Now that he had got into the swing of his work, the days passed very
quickly; and with his life after office-hours he had no fault to find
at all.

His life was very regular. He would arrive in the morning just in time
to sign his name in the attendance-book before it was removed to the
accountant's room. That was at ten o'clock. From ten to eleven he would
potter. There was nothing going on at that time in his department, and
Mr Waller seemed to take it for granted that he should stroll off to
the Postage Department and talk to Psmith, who had generally some fresh
grievance against the ring-wearing Bristow to air. From eleven to half
past twelve he would put in a little gentle work. Lunch, unless there
was a rush of business or Mr Waller happened to suffer from a spasm of
conscientiousness, could be spun out from half past twelve to two. More
work from two till half past three. From half past three till half past
four tea in the tearoom, with a novel. And from half past four till
five either a little more work or more pottering, according to whether
there was any work to do or not. It was by no means an unpleasant mode
of spending a late January day.

Then there was no doubt that it was an interesting little community,
that of the New Asiatic Bank. The curiously amateurish nature of the
institution lent a certain air of light-heartedness to the place. It
was not like one of those banks whose London office is their main
office, where stern business is everything and a man becomes a mere
machine for getting through a certain amount of routine work. The
employees of the New Asiatic Bank, having plenty of time on their
hands, were able to retain their individuality. They had leisure to
think of other things besides their work. Indeed, they had so much
leisure that it is a wonder they thought of their work at all.

The place was full of quaint characters. There was West, who had been
requested to leave Haileybury owing to his habit of borrowing horses
and attending meets in the neighbourhood, the same being always out of
bounds and necessitating a complete disregard of the rules respecting
evening chapel and lock-up. He was a small, dried-up youth, with black
hair plastered down on his head. He went about his duties in a costume
which suggested the sportsman of the comic papers.

There was also Hignett, who added to the meagre salary allowed him by
the bank by singing comic songs at the minor music halls. He confided
to Mike his intention of leaving the bank as soon as he had made a
name, and taking seriously to the business. He told him that he had
knocked them at the Bedford the week before, and in support of the
statement showed him a cutting from the Era, in which the writer said
that 'Other acceptable turns were the Bounding Zouaves, Steingruber's
Dogs, and Arthur Hignett.' Mike wished him luck.

And there was Raymond who dabbled in journalism and was the author of
'Straight Talks to Housewives' in _Trifles_, under the pseudonym
of 'Lady Gussie'; Wragge, who believed that the earth was flat, and
addressed meetings on the subject in Hyde Park on Sundays; and many
others, all interesting to talk to of a morning when work was slack and
time had to be filled in.

Mike found himself, by degrees, growing quite attached to the New
Asiatic Bank.

One morning, early in February, he noticed a curious change in Mr
Waller. The head of the Cash Department was, as a rule, mildly cheerful
on arrival, and apt (excessively, Mike thought, though he always
listened with polite interest) to relate the most recent sayings and
doings of his snub-nosed son, Edward. No action of this young prodigy
was withheld from Mike. He had heard, on different occasions, how he
had won a prize at his school for General Information (which Mike could
well believe); how he had trapped young Mr Richards, now happily
reconciled to Ada, with an ingenious verbal catch; and how he had made
a sequence of diverting puns on the name of the new curate, during the
course of that cleric's first Sunday afternoon visit.

On this particular day, however, the cashier was silent and
absent-minded. He answered Mike's good-morning mechanically, and
sitting down at his desk, stared blankly across the building. There
was a curiously grey, tired look on his face.

Mike could not make it out. He did not like to ask if there was
anything the matter. Mr Waller's face had the unreasonable effect on
him of making him feel shy and awkward. Anything in the nature of
sorrow always dried Mike up and robbed him of the power of speech.
Being naturally sympathetic, he had raged inwardly in many a crisis at
this devil of dumb awkwardness which possessed him and prevented him
from putting his sympathy into words. He had always envied the cooing
readiness of the hero on the stage when anyone was in trouble. He
wondered whether he would ever acquire that knack of pouring out a
limpid stream of soothing words on such occasions. At present he could
get no farther than a scowl and an almost offensive gruffness.

The happy thought struck him of consulting Psmith. It was his hour for
pottering, so he pottered round to the Postage Department, where he
found the old Etonian eyeing with disfavour a new satin tie which
Bristow was wearing that morning for the first time.

'I say, Smith,' he said, 'I want to speak to you for a second.'

Psmith rose. Mike led the way to a quiet corner of the Telegrams
Department.

'I tell you, Comrade Jackson,' said Psmith, 'I am hard pressed. The
fight is beginning to be too much for me. After a grim struggle, after
days of unremitting toil, I succeeded yesterday in inducing the man
Bristow to abandon that rainbow waistcoat of his. Today I enter the
building, blythe and buoyant, worn, of course, from the long struggle,
but seeing with aching eyes the dawn of another, better era, and there
is Comrade Bristow in a satin tie. It's hard, Comrade Jackson, it's
hard, I tell you.'

'Look here, Smith,' said Mike, 'I wish you'd go round to the Cash and
find out what's up with old Waller. He's got the hump about something.
He's sitting there looking absolutely fed up with things. I hope
there's nothing up. He's not a bad sort. It would be rot if anything
rotten's happened.'

Psmith began to display a gentle interest.

'So other people have troubles as well as myself,' he murmured
musingly. 'I had almost forgotten that. Comrade Waller's misfortunes
cannot but be trivial compared with mine, but possibly it will be as
well to ascertain their nature. I will reel round and make inquiries.'

'Good man,' said Mike. 'I'll wait here.'

Psmith departed, and returned, ten minutes later, looking more serious
than when he had left.

'His kid's ill, poor chap,' he said briefly. 'Pretty badly too, from
what I can gather. Pneumonia. Waller was up all night. He oughtn't to
be here at all today. He doesn't know what he's doing half the time.
He's absolutely fagged out. Look here, you'd better nip back and do as
much of the work as you can. I shouldn't talk to him much if I were
you. Buck along.'

Mike went. Mr Waller was still sitting staring out across the aisle.
There was something more than a little gruesome in the sight of him. He
wore a crushed, beaten look, as if all the life and fight had gone out
of him. A customer came to the desk to cash a cheque. The cashier
shovelled the money to him under the bars with the air of one whose
mind is elsewhere. Mike could guess what he was feeling, and what he
was thinking about. The fact that the snub-nosed Edward was, without
exception, the most repulsive small boy he had ever met in this world,
where repulsive small boys crowd and jostle one another, did not
interfere with his appreciation of the cashier's state of mind. Mike's
was essentially a sympathetic character. He had the gift of intuitive
understanding, where people of whom he was fond were concerned. It was
this which drew to him those who had intelligence enough to see beyond
his sometimes rather forbidding manner, and to realize that his blunt
speech was largely due to shyness. In spite of his prejudice against
Edward, he could put himself into Mr Waller's place, and see the thing
from his point of view.

Psmith's injunction to him not to talk much was unnecessary. Mike, as
always, was rendered utterly dumb by the sight of suffering. He sat at
his desk, occupying himself as best he could with the driblets of work
which came to him.

Mr Waller's silence and absentness continued unchanged. The habit of
years had made his work mechanical. Probably few of the customers who
came to cash cheques suspected that there was anything the matter with
the man who paid them their money. After all, most people look on the
cashier of a bank as a sort of human slot-machine. You put in your
cheque, and out comes money. It is no affair of yours whether life is
treating the machine well or ill that day.

The hours dragged slowly by till five o'clock struck, and the cashier,
putting on his coat and hat, passed silently out through the swing
doors. He walked listlessly. He was evidently tired out.

Mike shut his ledger with a vicious bang, and went across to find
Psmith. He was glad the day was over.


20. Concerning a Cheque


Things never happen quite as one expects them to. Mike came to the
office next morning prepared for a repetition of the previous day. He
was amazed to find the cashier not merely cheerful, but even
exuberantly cheerful. Edward, it appeared, had rallied in the
afternoon, and, when his father had got home, had been out of danger.
He was now going along excellently, and had stumped Ada, who was
nursing him, with a question about the Thirty Years' War, only a few
minutes before his father had left to catch his train. The cashier was
overflowing with happiness and goodwill towards his species. He greeted
customers with bright remarks on the weather, and snappy views on the
leading events of the day: the former tinged with optimism, the latter
full of a gentle spirit of toleration. His attitude towards the latest
actions of His Majesty's Government was that of one who felt that,
after all, there was probably some good even in the vilest of his
fellow creatures, if one could only find it.

Altogether, the cloud had lifted from the Cash Department. All was joy,
jollity, and song.

'The attitude of Comrade Waller,' said Psmith, on being informed of the
change, 'is reassuring. I may now think of my own troubles. Comrade
Bristow has blown into the office today in patent leather boots with
white kid uppers, as I believe the technical term is. Add to that the
fact that he is still wearing the satin tie, the waistcoat, and the
ring, and you will understand why I have definitely decided this
morning to abandon all hope of his reform. Henceforth my services, for
what they are worth, are at the disposal of Comrade Bickersdyke. My
time from now onward is his. He shall have the full educative value of
my exclusive attention. I give Comrade Bristow up. Made straight for
the corner flag, you understand,' he added, as Mr Rossiter emerged from
his lair, 'and centred, and Sandy Turnbull headed a beautiful goal. I
was just telling Jackson about the match against Blackburn Rovers,' he
said to Mr Rossiter.

'Just so, just so. But get on with your work, Smith. We are a little
behind-hand. I think perhaps it would be as well not to leave it just
yet.'

'I will leap at it at once,' said Psmith cordially.

Mike went back to his department.

The day passed quickly. Mr Waller, in the intervals of work, talked a
good deal, mostly of Edward, his doings, his sayings, and his
prospects. The only thing that seemed to worry Mr Waller was the
problem of how to employ his son's almost superhuman talents to the
best advantage. Most of the goals towards which the average man strives
struck him as too unambitious for the prodigy.

By the end of the day Mike had had enough of Edward. He never wished to
hear the name again.

We do not claim originality for the statement that things never happen
quite as one expects them to. We repeat it now because of its profound
truth. The Edward's pneumonia episode having ended satisfactorily (or,
rather, being apparently certain to end satisfactorily, for the
invalid, though out of danger, was still in bed), Mike looked forward
to a series of days unbroken by any but the minor troubles of life. For
these he was prepared. What he did not expect was any big calamity.

At the beginning of the day there were no signs of it. The sky was blue
and free from all suggestions of approaching thunderbolts. Mr Waller,
still chirpy, had nothing but good news of Edward. Mike went for his
morning stroll round the office feeling that things had settled down
and had made up their mind to run smoothly.

When he got back, barely half an hour later, the storm had burst.

There was no one in the department at the moment of his arrival; but a
few minutes later he saw Mr Waller come out of the manager's room, and
make his way down the aisle.

It was his walk which first gave any hint that something was wrong. It
was the same limp, crushed walk which Mike had seen when Edward's
safety still hung in the balance.

As Mr Waller came nearer, Mike saw that the cashier's face was deadly
pale.

Mr Waller caught sight of him and quickened his pace.

'Jackson,' he said.

Mike came forward.

'Do you--remember--' he spoke slowly, and with an effort, 'do you
remember a cheque coming through the day before yesterday for a hundred
pounds, with Sir John Morrison's signature?'

'Yes. It came in the morning, rather late.'

Mike remembered the cheque perfectly well, owing to the amount. It was
the only three-figure cheque which had come across the counter during
the day. It had been presented just before the cashier had gone out to
lunch. He recollected the man who had presented it, a tallish man with
a beard. He had noticed him particularly because of the contrast
between his manner and that of the cashier. The former had been so very
cheery and breezy, the latter so dazed and silent.

'Why,' he said.

'It was a forgery,' muttered Mr Waller, sitting down heavily.

Mike could not take it in all at once. He was stunned. All he could
understand was that a far worse thing had happened than anything he
could have imagined.

'A forgery?' he said.

'A forgery. And a clumsy one. Oh it's hard. I should have seen it on
any other day but that. I could not have missed it. They showed me the
cheque in there just now. I could not believe that I had passed it. I
don't remember doing it. My mind was far away. I don't remember the
cheque or anything about it. Yet there it is.'

Once more Mike was tongue-tied. For the life of him he could not think
of anything to say. Surely, he thought, he could find _something_
in the shape of words to show his sympathy. But he could find nothing
that would not sound horribly stilted and cold. He sat silent.

'Sir John is in there,' went on the cashier. 'He is furious. Mr
Bickersdyke, too. They are both furious. I shall be dismissed. I shall
lose my place. I shall be dismissed.' He was talking more to himself
than to Mike. It was dreadful to see him sitting there, all limp and
broken.

'I shall lose my place. Mr Bickersdyke has wanted to get rid of me for
a long time. He never liked me. I shall be dismissed. What can I do?
I'm an old man. I can't make another start. I am good for nothing.
Nobody will take an old man like me.'

His voice died away. There was a silence. Mike sat staring miserably in
front of him.

Then, quite suddenly, an idea came to him. The whole pressure of the
atmosphere seemed to lift. He saw a way out. It was a curious crooked
way, but at that moment it stretched clear and broad before him. He
felt lighthearted and excited, as if he were watching the development
of some interesting play at the theatre.

He got up, smiling.

The cashier did not notice the movement. Somebody had come in to cash a
cheque, and he was working mechanically.

Mike walked up the aisle to Mr Bickersdyke's room, and went in.

The manager was in his chair at the big table. Opposite him, facing
slightly sideways, was a small, round, very red-faced man. Mr
Bickersdyke was speaking as Mike entered.

'I can assure you, Sir John--' he was saying.

He looked up as the door opened.

'Well, Mr Jackson?'

Mike almost laughed. The situation was tickling him.

'Mr Waller has told me--' he began.

'I have already seen Mr Waller.'

'I know. He told me about the cheque. I came to explain.'

'Explain?'

'Yes. He didn't cash it at all.'

'I don't understand you, Mr Jackson.'

'I was at the counter when it was brought in,' said Mike. 'I cashed it.'


21. Psmith Makes Inquiries


Psmith, as was his habit of a morning when the fierce rush of his
commercial duties had abated somewhat, was leaning gracefully against
his desk, musing on many things, when he was aware that Bristow was
standing before him.

Focusing his attention with some reluctance upon this blot on the
horizon, he discovered that the exploiter of rainbow waistcoats and
satin ties was addressing him.

'I say, Smithy,' said Bristow. He spoke in rather an awed voice.

'Say on, Comrade Bristow,' said Psmith graciously. 'You have our ear.
You would seem to have something on your chest in addition to that
Neapolitan ice garment which, I regret to see, you still flaunt. If it
is one tithe as painful as that, you have my sympathy. Jerk it out,
Comrade Bristow.'

'Jackson isn't half copping it from old Bick.'

'Isn't--? What exactly did you say?'

'He's getting it hot on the carpet.'

'You wish to indicate,' said Psmith, 'that there is some slight
disturbance, some passing breeze between Comrades Jackson and
Bickersdyke?'

Bristow chuckled.

'Breeze! Blooming hurricane, more like it. I was in Bick's room just
now with a letter to sign, and I tell you, the fur was flying all over
the bally shop. There was old Bick cursing for all he was worth, and a
little red-faced buffer puffing out his cheeks in an armchair.'

'We all have our hobbies,' said Psmith.

'Jackson wasn't saying much. He jolly well hadn't a chance. Old Bick
was shooting it out fourteen to the dozen.'

'I have been privileged,' said Psmith, 'to hear Comrade Bickersdyke
speak both in his sanctum and in public. He has, as you suggest, a
ready flow of speech. What, exactly was the cause of the turmoil?'

'I couldn't wait to hear. I was too jolly glad to get away. Old Bick
looked at me as if he could eat me, snatched the letter out of my hand,
signed it, and waved his hand at the door as a hint to hop it. Which I
jolly well did. He had started jawing Jackson again before I was out of
the room.'

'While applauding his hustle,' said Psmith, 'I fear that I must take
official notice of this. Comrade Jackson is essentially a Sensitive
Plant, highly strung, neurotic. I cannot have his nervous system jolted
and disorganized in this manner, and his value as a confidential
secretary and adviser impaired, even though it be only temporarily. I
must look into this. I will go and see if the orgy is concluded. I will
hear what Comrade Jackson has to say on the matter. I shall not act
rashly, Comrade Bristow. If the man Bickersdyke is proved to have had
good grounds for his outbreak, he shall escape uncensured. I may even
look in on him and throw him a word of praise. But if I find, as I
suspect, that he has wronged Comrade Jackson, I shall be forced to
speak sharply to him.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Mike had left the scene of battle by the time Psmith reached the Cash
Department, and was sitting at his desk in a somewhat dazed condition,
trying to clear his mind sufficiently to enable him to see exactly how
matters stood as concerned himself. He felt confused and rattled. He
had known, when he went to the manager's room to make his statement,
that there would be trouble. But, then, trouble is such an elastic
word. It embraces a hundred degrees of meaning. Mike had expected
sentence of dismissal, and he had got it. So far he had nothing to
complain of. But he had not expected it to come to him riding high on
the crest of a great, frothing wave of verbal denunciation. Mr
Bickersdyke, through constantly speaking in public, had developed the
habit of fluent denunciation to a remarkable extent. He had thundered
at Mike as if Mike had been his Majesty's Government or the Encroaching
Alien, or something of that sort. And that kind of thing is a little
overwhelming at short range. Mike's head was still spinning.

It continued to spin; but he never lost sight of the fact round which
it revolved, namely, that he had been dismissed from the service of the
bank. And for the first time he began to wonder what they would say
about this at home.

Up till now the matter had seemed entirely a personal one. He had
charged in to rescue the harassed cashier in precisely the same way as
that in which he had dashed in to save him from Bill, the Stone-Flinging
Scourge of Clapham Common. Mike's was one of those direct, honest minds
which are apt to concentrate themselves on the crisis of the moment,
and to leave the consequences out of the question entirely.

What would they say at home? That was the point.

Again, what could he do by way of earning a living? He did not know
much about the City and its ways, but he knew enough to understand that
summary dismissal from a bank is not the best recommendation one can
put forward in applying for another job. And if he did not get another
job in the City, what could he do? If it were only summer, he might get
taken on somewhere as a cricket professional. Cricket was his line. He
could earn his pay at that. But it was very far from being summer.

He had turned the problem over in his mind till his head ached, and had
eaten in the process one-third of a wooden penholder, when Psmith
arrived.

'It has reached me,' said Psmith, 'that you and Comrade Bickersdyke
have been seen doing the Hackenschmidt-Gotch act on the floor. When my
informant left, he tells me, Comrade B. had got a half-Nelson on you,
and was biting pieces out of your ear. Is this so?'

Mike got up. Psmith was the man, he felt, to advise him in this crisis.
Psmith's was the mind to grapple with his Hard Case.

'Look here, Smith,' he said, 'I want to speak to you. I'm in a bit of a
hole, and perhaps you can tell me what to do. Let's go out and have a
cup of coffee, shall we? I can't tell you about it here.'

'An admirable suggestion,' said Psmith. 'Things in the Postage
Department are tolerably quiescent at present. Naturally I shall be
missed, if I go out. But my absence will not spell irretrievable ruin,
as it would at a period of greater commercial activity. Comrades
Rossiter and Bristow have studied my methods. They know how I like
things to be done. They are fully competent to conduct the business of
the department in my absence. Let us, as you say, scud forth. We will
go to a Mecca. Why so-called I do not know, nor, indeed, do I ever hope
to know. There we may obtain, at a price, a passable cup of coffee, and
you shall tell me your painful story.'

The Mecca, except for the curious aroma which pervades all Meccas, was
deserted. Psmith, moving a box of dominoes on to the next table, sat
down.

'Dominoes,' he said, 'is one of the few manly sports which have never
had great attractions for me. A cousin of mine, who secured his chess
blue at Oxford, would, they tell me, have represented his University in
the dominoes match also, had he not unfortunately dislocated the radius
bone of his bazooka while training for it. Except for him, there has
been little dominoes talent in the Psmith family. Let us merely talk.
What of this slight brass-rag-parting to which I alluded just now? Tell
me all.'

He listened gravely while Mike related the incidents which had led up
to his confession and the results of the same. At the conclusion of the
narrative he sipped his coffee in silence for a moment.

'This habit of taking on to your shoulders the harvest of other
people's bloomers,' he said meditatively, 'is growing upon you, Comrade
Jackson. You must check it. It is like dram-drinking. You begin in a
small way by breaking school rules to extract Comrade Jellicoe (perhaps
the supremest of all the blitherers I have ever met) from a hole. If
you had stopped there, all might have been well. But the thing, once
started, fascinated you. Now you have landed yourself with a splash in
the very centre of the Oxo in order to do a good turn to Comrade
Waller. You must drop it, Comrade Jackson. When you were free and
without ties, it did not so much matter. But now that you are
confidential secretary and adviser to a Shropshire Psmith, the thing
must stop. Your secretarial duties must be paramount. Nothing must be
allowed to interfere with them. Yes. The thing must stop before it goes
too far.'

'It seems to me,' said Mike, 'that it has gone too far. I've got the
sack. I don't know how much farther you want it to go.'

Psmith stirred his coffee before replying.

'True,' he said, 'things look perhaps a shade rocky just now, but all
is not yet lost. You must recollect that Comrade Bickersdyke spoke in
the heat of the moment. That generous temperament was stirred to its
depths. He did not pick his words. But calm will succeed storm, and we
may be able to do something yet. I have some little influence with
Comrade Bickersdyke. Wrongly, perhaps,' added Psmith modestly, 'he
thinks somewhat highly of my judgement. If he sees that I am opposed to
this step, he may possibly reconsider it. What Psmith thinks today, is
his motto, I shall think tomorrow. However, we shall see.'

'I bet we shall!' said Mike ruefully.

'There is, moreover,' continued Psmith, 'another aspect to the affair.
When you were being put through it, in Comrade Bickersdyke's inimitably
breezy manner, Sir John What's-his-name was, I am given to understand,
present. Naturally, to pacify the aggrieved bart., Comrade B. had to
lay it on regardless of expense. In America, as possibly you are aware,
there is a regular post of mistake-clerk, whose duty it is to receive
in the neck anything that happens to be coming along when customers
make complaints. He is hauled into the presence of the foaming
customer, cursed, and sacked. The customer goes away appeased. The
mistake-clerk, if the harangue has been unusually energetic, applies
for a rise of salary. Now, possibly, in your case--'

'In my case,' interrupted Mike, 'there was none of that rot.
Bickersdyke wasn't putting it on. He meant every word. Why, dash it
all, you know yourself he'd be only too glad to sack me, just to get
some of his own back with me.'

Psmith's eyes opened in pained surprise.

'Get some of his own back!' he repeated.

'Are you insinuating, Comrade Jackson, that my relations with Comrade
Bickersdyke are not of the most pleasant and agreeable nature possible?
How do these ideas get about? I yield to nobody in my respect for our
manager. I may have had occasion from time to time to correct him in
some trifling matter, but surely he is not the man to let such a thing
rankle? No! I prefer to think that Comrade Bickersdyke regards me as
his friend and well-wisher, and will lend a courteous ear to any
proposal I see fit to make. I hope shortly to be able to prove this to
you. I will discuss this little affair of the cheque with him at our
ease at the club, and I shall be surprised if we do not come to some
arrangement.'

'Look here, Smith,' said Mike earnestly, 'for goodness' sake don't go
playing the goat. There's no earthly need for you to get lugged into
this business. Don't you worry about me. I shall be all right.'

'I think,' said Psmith, 'that you will--when I have chatted with
Comrade Bickersdyke.'


22. And Take Steps


On returning to the bank, Mike found Mr Waller in the grip of a
peculiarly varied set of mixed feelings. Shortly after Mike's departure
for the Mecca, the cashier had been summoned once more into the
Presence, and had there been informed that, as apparently he had not
been directly responsible for the gross piece of carelessness by which
the bank had suffered so considerable a loss (here Sir John puffed out
his cheeks like a meditative toad), the matter, as far as he was
concerned, was at an end. On the other hand--! Here Mr Waller was
hauled over the coals for Incredible Rashness in allowing a mere junior
subordinate to handle important tasks like the paying out of money, and
so on, till he felt raw all over. However, it was not dismissal. That
was the great thing. And his principal sensation was one of relief.

Mingled with the relief were sympathy for Mike, gratitude to him for
having given himself up so promptly, and a curiously dazed sensation,
as if somebody had been hitting him on the head with a bolster.

All of which emotions, taken simultaneously, had the effect of
rendering him completely dumb when he saw Mike. He felt that he did not
know what to say to him. And as Mike, for his part, simply wanted to be
let alone, and not compelled to talk, conversation was at something of
a standstill in the Cash Department.

After five minutes, it occurred to Mr Waller that perhaps the best plan
would be to interview Psmith. Psmith would know exactly how matters
stood. He could not ask Mike point-blank whether he had been dismissed.
But there was the probability that Psmith had been informed and would
pass on the information.

Psmith received the cashier with a dignified kindliness.

'Oh, er, Smith,' said Mr Waller, 'I wanted just to ask you about
Jackson.'

Psmith bowed his head gravely.

'Exactly,' he said. 'Comrade Jackson. I think I may say that you have
come to the right man. Comrade Jackson has placed himself in my hands,
and I am dealing with his case. A somewhat tricky business, but I shall
see him through.'

'Has he--?' Mr Waller hesitated.

'You were saying?' said Psmith.

'Does Mr Bickersdyke intend to dismiss him?'

'At present,' admitted Psmith, 'there is some idea of that description
floating--nebulously, as it were--in Comrade Bickersdyke's mind.
Indeed, from what I gather from my client, the push was actually
administered, in so many words. But tush! And possibly bah! we know
what happens on these occasions, do we not? You and I are students of
human nature, and we know that a man of Comrade Bickersdyke's
warm-hearted type is apt to say in the heat of the moment a great deal
more than he really means. Men of his impulsive character cannot help
expressing themselves in times of stress with a certain generous
strength which those who do not understand them are inclined to take a
little too seriously. I shall have a chat with Comrade Bickersdyke at
the conclusion of the day's work, and I have no doubt that we shall
both laugh heartily over this little episode.'

Mr Waller pulled at his beard, with an expression on his face that
seemed to suggest that he was not quite so confident on this point. He
was about to put his doubts into words when Mr Rossiter appeared, and
Psmith, murmuring something about duty, turned again to his ledger. The
cashier drifted back to his own department.

It was one of Psmith's theories of Life, which he was accustomed to
propound to Mike in the small hours of the morning with his feet on the
mantelpiece, that the secret of success lay in taking advantage of
one's occasional slices of luck, in seizing, as it were, the happy
moment. When Mike, who had had the passage to write out ten times at
Wrykyn on one occasion as an imposition, reminded him that Shakespeare
had once said something about there being a tide in the affairs of men,
which, taken at the flood, &c., Psmith had acknowledged with an easy
grace that possibly Shakespeare _had_ got on to it first, and that
it was but one more proof of how often great minds thought alike.

Though waiving his claim to the copyright of the maxim, he nevertheless
had a high opinion of it, and frequently acted upon it in the conduct
of his own life.

Thus, when approaching the Senior Conservative Club at five o'clock
with the idea of finding Mr Bickersdyke there, he observed his quarry
entering the Turkish Baths which stand some twenty yards from the
club's front door, he acted on his maxim, and decided, instead of
waiting for the manager to finish his bath before approaching him on
the subject of Mike, to corner him in the Baths themselves.

He gave Mr Bickersdyke five minutes' start. Then, reckoning that by
that time he would probably have settled down, he pushed open the door
and went in himself. And, having paid his money, and left his boots
with the boy at the threshold, he was rewarded by the sight of the
manager emerging from a box at the far end of the room, clad in the
mottled towels which the bather, irrespective of his personal taste in
dress, is obliged to wear in a Turkish bath.

Psmith made for the same box. Mr Bickersdyke's clothes lay at the head
of one of the sofas, but nobody else had staked out a claim. Psmith
took possession of the sofa next to the manager's. Then, humming
lightly, he undressed, and made his way downstairs to the Hot Rooms. He
rather fancied himself in towels. There was something about them which
seemed to suit his figure. They gave him, he though, rather a
_debonnaire_ look. He paused for a moment before the looking-glass
to examine himself, with approval, then pushed open the door of the Hot
Rooms and went in.


23. Mr Bickersdyke Makes a Concession


Mr Bickersdyke was reclining in an easy-chair in the first room,
staring before him in the boiled-fish manner customary in a Turkish
Bath. Psmith dropped into the next seat with a cheery 'Good evening.'
The manager started as if some firm hand had driven a bradawl into him.
He looked at Psmith with what was intended to be a dignified stare. But
dignity is hard to achieve in a couple of parti-coloured towels. The
stare did not differ to any great extent from the conventional
boiled-fish look, alluded to above.

Psmith settled himself comfortably in his chair. 'Fancy finding you
here,' he said pleasantly. 'We seem always to be meeting. To me,' he
added, with a reassuring smile, 'it is a great pleasure. A very great
pleasure indeed. We see too little of each other during office hours.
Not that one must grumble at that. Work before everything. You have
your duties, I mine. It is merely unfortunate that those duties are not
such as to enable us to toil side by side, encouraging each other with
word and gesture. However, it is idle to repine. We must make the most
of these chance meetings when the work of the day is over.'

Mr Bickersdyke heaved himself up from his chair and took another at the
opposite end of the room. Psmith joined him.

'There's something pleasantly mysterious, to my mind,' said he
chattily, 'in a Turkish Bath. It seems to take one out of the hurry and
bustle of the everyday world. It is a quiet backwater in the rushing
river of Life. I like to sit and think in a Turkish Bath. Except, of
course, when I have a congenial companion to talk to. As now. To me--'

Mr Bickersdyke rose, and went into the next room.

'To me,' continued Psmith, again following, and seating himself beside
the manager, 'there is, too, something eerie in these places. There is
a certain sinister air about the attendants. They glide rather than
walk. They say little. Who knows what they may be planning and
plotting? That drip-drip again. It may be merely water, but how are we
to know that it is not blood? It would be so easy to do away with a man
in a Turkish Bath. Nobody has seen him come in. Nobody can trace him if
he disappears. These are uncomfortable thoughts, Mr Bickersdyke.'

Mr Bickersdyke seemed to think them so. He rose again, and returned to
the first room.

'I have made you restless,' said Psmith, in a voice of self-reproach,
when he had settled himself once more by the manager's side. 'I am
sorry. I will not pursue the subject. Indeed, I believe that my fears
are unnecessary. Statistics show, I understand, that large numbers of
men emerge in safety every year from Turkish Baths. There was another
matter of which I wished to speak to you. It is a somewhat delicate
matter, and I am only encouraged to mention it to you by the fact that
you are so close a friend of my father's.'

Mr Bickersdyke had picked up an early edition of an evening paper, left
on the table at his side by a previous bather, and was to all
appearances engrossed in it. Psmith, however, not discouraged,
proceeded to touch upon the matter of Mike.

'There was,' he said, 'some little friction, I hear, in the office
today in connection with a cheque.' The evening paper hid the manager's
expressive face, but from the fact that the hands holding it tightened
their grip Psmith deduced that Mr Bickersdyke's attention was not
wholly concentrated on the City news. Moreover, his toes wriggled. And
when a man's toes wriggle, he is interested in what you are saying.

'All these petty breezes,' continued Psmith sympathetically, 'must be
very trying to a man in your position, a man who wishes to be left
alone in order to devote his entire thought to the niceties of the
higher Finance. It is as if Napoleon, while planning out some intricate
scheme of campaign, were to be called upon in the midst of his
meditations to bully a private for not cleaning his buttons. Naturally,
you were annoyed. Your giant brain, wrenched temporarily from its
proper groove, expended its force in one tremendous reprimand of
Comrade Jackson. It was as if one had diverted some terrific electric
current which should have been controlling a vast system of machinery,
and turned it on to annihilate a black-beetle. In the present case, of
course, the result is as might have been expected. Comrade Jackson, not
realizing the position of affairs, went away with the absurd idea that
all was over, that you meant all you said--briefly, that his number was
up. I assured him that he was mistaken, but no! He persisted in
declaring that all was over, that you had dismissed him from the bank.'

Mr Bickersdyke lowered the paper and glared bulbously at the old
Etonian.

'Mr Jackson is perfectly right,' he snapped. 'Of course I dismissed
him.'

'Yes, yes,' said Psmith, 'I have no doubt that at the moment you did
work the rapid push. What I am endeavouring to point out is that
Comrade Jackson is under the impression that the edict is permanent,
that he can hope for no reprieve.'

'Nor can he.'

'You don't mean--'

'I mean what I say.'

'Ah, I quite understand,' said Psmith, as one who sees that he must
make allowances. 'The incident is too recent. The storm has not yet had
time to expend itself. You have not had leisure to think the matter
over coolly. It is hard, of course, to be cool in a Turkish Bath. Your
ganglions are still vibrating. Later, perhaps--'

'Once and for all,' growled Mr Bickersdyke, 'the thing is ended. Mr
Jackson will leave the bank at the end of the month. We have no room
for fools in the office.'

'You surprise me,' said Psmith. 'I should not have thought that the
standard of intelligence in the bank was extremely high. With the
exception of our two selves, I think that there are hardly any men of
real intelligence on the staff. And comrade Jackson is improving every
day. Being, as he is, under my constant supervision he is rapidly
developing a stranglehold on his duties, which--'

'I have no wish to discuss the matter any further.'

'No, no. Quite so, quite so. Not another word. I am dumb.'

'There are limits you see, to the uses of impertinence, Mr Smith.'

Psmith started.

'You are not suggesting--! You do not mean that I--!'

'I have no more to say. I shall be glad if you will allow me to read my
paper.'

Psmith waved a damp hand.

'I should be the last man,' he said stiffly, 'to force my conversation
on another. I was under the impression that you enjoyed these little
chats as keenly as I did. If I was wrong--'

He relapsed into a wounded silence. Mr Bickersdyke resumed his perusal
of the evening paper, and presently, laying it down, rose and made his
way to the room where muscular attendants were in waiting to perform
that blend of Jiu-Jitsu and Catch-as-catch-can which is the most
valuable and at the same time most painful part of a Turkish Bath.

It was not till he was resting on his sofa, swathed from head to foot
in a sheet and smoking a cigarette, that he realized that Psmith was
sharing his compartment.

He made the unpleasant discovery just as he had finished his first
cigarette and lighted his second. He was blowing out the match when
Psmith, accompanied by an attendant, appeared in the doorway, and
proceeded to occupy the next sofa to himself. All that feeling of
dreamy peace, which is the reward one receives for allowing oneself to
be melted like wax and kneaded like bread, left him instantly. He felt
hot and annoyed. To escape was out of the question. Once one has been
scientifically wrapped up by the attendant and placed on one's sofa,
one is a fixture. He lay scowling at the ceiling, resolved to combat
all attempt at conversation with a stony silence.

Psmith, however, did not seem to desire conversation. He lay on his
sofa motionless for a quarter of an hour, then reached out for a large
book which lay on the table, and began to read.

When he did speak, he seemed to be speaking to himself. Every now and
then he would murmur a few words, sometimes a single name. In spite of
himself, Mr Bickersdyke found himself listening.

At first the murmurs conveyed nothing to him. Then suddenly a name
caught his ear. Strowther was the name, and somehow it suggested
something to him. He could not say precisely what. It seemed to touch
some chord of memory. He knew no one of the name of Strowther. He was
sure of that. And yet it was curiously familiar. An unusual name, too.
He could not help feeling that at one time he must have known it quite
well.

'Mr Strowther,' murmured Psmith, 'said that the hon. gentleman's
remarks would have been nothing short of treason, if they had not been
so obviously the mere babblings of an irresponsible lunatic. Cries of
"Order, order," and a voice, "Sit down, fat-head!"'

For just one moment Mr Bickersdyke's memory poised motionless, like a
hawk about to swoop. Then it darted at the mark. Everything came to him
in a flash. The hands of the clock whizzed back. He was no longer Mr
John Bickersdyke, manager of the London branch of the New Asiatic Bank,
lying on a sofa in the Cumberland Street Turkish Baths. He was Jack
Bickersdyke, clerk in the employ of Messrs Norton and Biggleswade,
standing on a chair and shouting 'Order! order!' in the Masonic Room of
the 'Red Lion' at Tulse Hill, while the members of the Tulse Hill
Parliament, divided into two camps, yelled at one another, and young
Tom Barlow, in his official capacity as Mister Speaker, waved his arms
dumbly, and banged the table with his mallet in his efforts to restore
calm.

He remembered the whole affair as if it had happened yesterday. It had
been a speech of his own which had called forth the above expression of
opinion from Strowther. He remembered Strowther now, a pale, spectacled
clerk in Baxter and Abrahams, an inveterate upholder of the throne, the
House of Lords and all constituted authority. Strowther had objected to
the socialistic sentiments of his speech in connection with the Budget,
and there had been a disturbance unparalleled even in the Tulse Hill
Parliament, where disturbances were frequent and loud....

Psmith looked across at him with a bright smile. 'They report you
verbatim,' he said. 'And rightly. A more able speech I have seldom
read. I like the bit where you call the Royal Family "blood-suckers".
Even then, it seems you knew how to express yourself fluently and
well.'

Mr Bickersdyke sat up. The hands of the clock had moved again, and he
was back in what Psmith had called the live, vivid present.

'What have you got there?' he demanded.

'It is a record,' said Psmith, 'of the meeting of an institution called
the Tulse Hill Parliament. A bright, chatty little institution, too, if
one may judge by these reports. You in particular, if I may say so,
appear to have let yourself go with refreshing vim. Your political
views have changed a great deal since those days, have they not? It is
extremely interesting. A most fascinating study for political students.
When I send these speeches of yours to the _Clarion_--'

Mr Bickersdyke bounded on his sofa.

'What!' he cried.

'I was saying,' said Psmith, 'that the _Clarion_ will probably
make a most interesting comparison between these speeches and those you
have been making at Kenningford.'

'I--I--I forbid you to make any mention of these speeches.'

Psmith hesitated.

'It would be great fun seeing what the papers said,' he protested.

'Great fun!'

'It is true,' mused Psmith, 'that in a measure, it would dish you at
the election. From what I saw of those light-hearted lads at
Kenningford the other night, I should say they would be so amused that
they would only just have enough strength left to stagger to the poll
and vote for your opponent.'

Mr Bickersdyke broke out into a cold perspiration.

'I forbid you to send those speeches to the papers,' he cried.

Psmith reflected.

'You see,' he said at last, 'it is like this. The departure of Comrade
Jackson, my confidential secretary and adviser, is certain to plunge me
into a state of the deepest gloom. The only way I can see at present by
which I can ensure even a momentary lightening of the inky cloud is the
sending of these speeches to some bright paper like the _Clarion._
I feel certain that their comments would wring, at any rate, a sad,
sweet smile from me. Possibly even a hearty laugh. I must, therefore,
look on these very able speeches of yours in something of the light of
an antidote. They will stand between me and black depression. Without
them I am in the cart. With them I may possibly buoy myself up.'

Mr Bickersdyke shifted uneasily on his sofa. He glared at the floor.
Then he eyed the ceiling as if it were a personal enemy of his. Finally
he looked at Psmith. Psmith's eyes were closed in peaceful meditation.

'Very well,' said he at last. 'Jackson shall stop.'

Psmith came out of his thoughts with a start. 'You were observing--?'
he said.

'I shall not dismiss Jackson,' said Mr Bickersdyke.

Psmith smiled winningly.

'Just as I had hoped,' he said. 'Your very justifiable anger melts
before reflection. The storm subsides, and you are at leisure to
examine the matter dispassionately. Doubts begin to creep in. Possibly,
you say to yourself, I have been too hasty, too harsh. Justice must be
tempered with mercy. I have caught Comrade Jackson bending, you add
(still to yourself), but shall I press home my advantage too
ruthlessly? No, you cry, I will abstain. And I applaud your action. I
like to see this spirit of gentle toleration. It is bracing and
comforting. As for these excellent speeches,' he added, 'I shall, of
course, no longer have any need of their consolation. I can lay them
aside. The sunlight can now enter and illumine my life through more
ordinary channels. The cry goes round, "Psmith is himself again."'

Mr Bickersdyke said nothing. Unless a snort of fury may be counted as
anything.


24. The Spirit of Unrest


During the following fortnight, two things happened which materially
altered Mike's position in the bank.

The first was that Mr Bickersdyke was elected a member of Parliament.
He got in by a small majority amidst scenes of disorder of a nature
unusual even in Kenningford. Psmith, who went down on the polling-day
to inspect the revels and came back with his hat smashed in, reported
that, as far as he could see, the electors of Kenningford seemed to be
in just that state of happy intoxication which might make them vote for
Mr Bickersdyke by mistake. Also it had been discovered, on the eve of
the poll, that the bank manager's opponent, in his youth, had been
educated at a school in Germany, and had subsequently spent two years
at Heidelberg University. These damaging revelations were having a
marked effect on the warm-hearted patriots of Kenningford, who were now
referring to the candidate in thick but earnest tones as 'the German
Spy'.

'So that taking everything into consideration,' said Psmith, summing
up, 'I fancy that Comrade Bickersdyke is home.'

And the papers next day proved that he was right.

'A hundred and fifty-seven,' said Psmith, as he read his paper at
breakfast. 'Not what one would call a slashing victory. It is fortunate
for Comrade Bickersdyke, I think, that I did not send those very able
speeches of his to the _Clarion'_.

Till now Mike had been completely at a loss to understand why the
manager had sent for him on the morning following the scene about the
cheque, and informed him that he had reconsidered his decision to
dismiss him. Mike could not help feeling that there was more in the
matter than met the eye. Mr Bickersdyke had not spoken as if it gave
him any pleasure to reprieve him. On the contrary, his manner was
distinctly brusque. Mike was thoroughly puzzled. To Psmith's statement,
that he had talked the matter over quietly with the manager and brought
things to a satisfactory conclusion, he had paid little attention. But
now he began to see light.

'Great Scott, Smith,' he said, 'did you tell him you'd send those
speeches to the papers if he sacked me?'

Psmith looked at him through his eye-glass, and helped himself to
another piece of toast.

'I am unable,' he said, 'to recall at this moment the exact terms of
the very pleasant conversation I had with Comrade Bickersdyke on the
occasion of our chance meeting in the Turkish Bath that afternoon; but,
thinking things over quietly now that I have more leisure, I cannot
help feeling that he may possibly have read some such intention into my
words. You know how it is in these little chats, Comrade Jackson. One
leaps to conclusions. Some casual word I happened to drop may have
given him the idea you mention. At this distance of time it is
impossible to say with any certainty. Suffice it that all has ended
well. He _did_ reconsider his resolve. I shall be only too happy
if it turns out that the seed of the alteration in his views was sown
by some careless word of mine. Perhaps we shall never know.'

Mike was beginning to mumble some awkward words of thanks, when Psmith
resumed his discourse.

'Be that as it may, however,' he said, 'we cannot but perceive that
Comrade Bickersdyke's election has altered our position to some extent.
As you have pointed out, he may have been influenced in this recent
affair by some chance remark of mine about those speeches. Now,
however, they will cease to be of any value. Now that he is elected he
has nothing to lose by their publication. I mention this by way of
indicating that it is possible that, if another painful episode occurs,
he may be more ruthless.'

'I see what you mean,' said Mike. 'If he catches me on the hop again,
he'll simply go ahead and sack me.'

'That,' said Psmith, 'is more or less the position of affairs.'

The other event which altered Mike's life in the bank was his removal
from Mr Waller's department to the Fixed Deposits. The work in the
Fixed Deposits was less pleasant, and Mr Gregory, the head of the
department was not of Mr Waller's type. Mr Gregory, before joining the
home-staff of the New Asiatic Bank, had spent a number of years with a
firm in the Far East, where he had acquired a liver and a habit of
addressing those under him in a way that suggested the mate of a tramp
steamer. Even on the days when his liver was not troubling him, he was
truculent. And when, as usually happened, it did trouble him, he was a
perfect fountain of abuse. Mike and he hated each other from the first.
The work in the Fixed Deposits was not really difficult, when you got
the hang of it, but there was a certain amount of confusion in it to a
beginner; and Mike, in commercial matters, was as raw a beginner as
ever began. In the two other departments through which he had passed,
he had done tolerably well. As regarded his work in the Postage
Department, stamping letters and taking them down to the post office
was just about his form. It was the sort of work on which he could
really get a grip. And in the Cash Department, Mr Waller's mild
patience had helped him through. But with Mr Gregory it was different.
Mike hated being shouted at. It confused him. And Mr Gregory invariably
shouted. He always spoke as if he were competing against a high wind.
With Mike he shouted more than usual. On his side, it must be admitted
that Mike was something out of the common run of bank clerks. The whole
system of banking was a horrid mystery to him. He did not understand
why things were done, or how the various departments depended on and
dove-tailed into one another. Each department seemed to him something
separate and distinct. Why they were all in the same building at all he
never really gathered. He knew that it could not be purely from motives
of sociability, in order that the clerks might have each other's
company during slack spells. That much he suspected, but beyond that he
was vague.

It naturally followed that, after having grown, little by little, under
Mr Waller's easy-going rule, to enjoy life in the bank, he now suffered
a reaction. Within a day of his arrival in the Fixed Deposits he was
loathing the place as earnestly as he had loathed it on the first
morning.

Psmith, who had taken his place in the Cash Department, reported that
Mr Waller was inconsolable at his loss.

'I do my best to cheer him up,' he said, 'and he smiles bravely every
now and then. But when he thinks I am not looking, his head droops and
that wistful expression comes into his face. The sunshine has gone out
of his life.'

It had just come into Mike's, and, more than anything else, was making
him restless and discontented. That is to say, it was now late spring:
the sun shone cheerfully on the City; and cricket was in the air. And
that was the trouble.

In the dark days, when everything was fog and slush, Mike had been
contented enough to spend his mornings and afternoons in the bank, and
go about with Psmith at night. Again! I really do n't think you ought
to!" And Art; oh, where was it? V I THE PROSPECTOR In the old mining
days out West the law of the not?

but that is in why men wondered at Peter's survival, marvelled at the
recuperative force that made possible his fourth attempt, speculated
with a certain survival of the fittest held good, and he who survived
had to be very fit indeed. There were a I number of ways of not surviving.
One of them was to die. And there were a number of ways of being very
fit; such as holding an accurate or an even temper, being blessed
have seen too much of it here--too much of the unhappiness that
comes from debt, from poverty.

Misery does not love the company of those it loves. Go make your fortune,
Peter with industry or a vital-tearing the man who survived must see his
clearly through that end's means. Whether it were gold, poker,
or life, he must cling to his purpose a bulldog tenacity that no
amount of distraction could loosen.

Otherwise, as has been said, he died, or begged, or robbed, or became
a tramp, or committed the suicide of horse-stealing, or just plain drifted
back East broken--a shameful thing. Why Peter lived on was
patent enough to anyone.

He was harmless, good-natured, and, in the estimation of hard-hewn,
men, just" enough to be a little pathetic. Anyone who had once caught
a fair look at his narrow, hatchet face with the surprised blue eyes and
the, sparse light hair; or had enjoyed his sweet', rare smile as he
deprecatingly answered his eager and pleased rendering of it: none of
these hypothetical individuals, and that meant about everyone who
came in contact with Peter at all, could have imagined anybody had
been resold to third parties.

Peter had no money to contest the affair; and probably would not have
which Peter selected were four in a purchaser among the inhabitants
of Beaver Dam, he knew that the veracity and his mining instinct.
and took notes for the balance.

When the notes came due he could not collect the condition of affairs
to ruffle its' peaceful serenity toil the hope of the unexpected.

A man must ignore his business to succeed. A, let difficulties, clamant
for technical knowledge, exacting of physical strength, dependent on
shrewdness and knowledge of the world. Peter had none of these, not
even in the smallest degree. There was also, of course, the instinct.
This and letting up on the sapling he crushed the quartz fragments
with the pestle into fine red and white sand He could follow his leads
of crumbling brown rock with that marvellous intuitive knowledge which
is so important Peter realised that he was getting to be an old
man. He took a picture from a pocket-case and looked at that. Was
she getting to be an old grubbed away cheerfully at divers mountains
and many ranges.

He had not succeeded; still, he had not failed. Three times had he made
his" strike." On the first of these three occasions he had gone in
with two San Francisco men to develop the property. The San Francisco
men had persuaded him to form a stock company of certain
capitalisation.

In two deals they had does n't make all there is on her."

The men laughed, but not ill-naturedly. They all knew Peter, as has been
said. Peter turned again to the door"frozen out" Peter completely and
reorganised on a basis which is paying them good dividends. Returning
overwhelmed with sophistries and"explanations" from his expostulatory
interview, Peter decided he knew more about quartz leads than business
and the disgorging of gains, so he went over into Idaho them number.
He started in without delay on the proof.

Foot by foot the shafts A sordid, silly little tale, is it awe over
that cheerful disposition which had earned him, even in his adversity,
the sobriquet of Happy Peter.

All of these phenomena, had they but known it,, resulted from one
simple cause.

Peter's mental retrospect for a considerable space would have
conjured up nothing but a succession of grand sweeps of mountains,
singing pines, western skies, and the answer simplicity of a
frontiersman's log-cabin; and yet to his inner vision over the border
of that space lay a very different scene from the tidings of his
discoveries would arouse interest and attract other prospectors to the
locality of his claims.

In this manner his property would come prominently on the market. The
discoveries certainly were accorded attention enough. Peter was well
known. Men were perfectly sure of his girl. It was to win both that
he had come West.

In those days, around the western curve of the, trips to camp; and
they are few. earth, every outlook borrowed the tints of sunset
Nothing but the length of the both hands on his shoulders," and I
do not care for the money But I., bravely, and come back to me.""

I will," replied Peter, soberly." I will, God help me. But it may be
long.

I do n't know; I have not the knack; I am stupid about people',
about men." She smiled, and leaned over to kiss his eyes. the
back, tries the patience, strains to the the ceaseless drudgery of
rock and pick the paltry years of staccato notes of bursting buds;
at last lifting its many voices in the gorgeous old swelling song
of delight over the love's waiting, saw nothing in to try again.

There he found the famous Antelope Gap lode This time he determined to
sell outright and have nothing more to do with the matter after
the transfer utmost the man's inborn Instinct of the" People love
you,," she said, simply."

I love you, and I will wait. If it were fifty years, you will find
me here ready when you come." Peter knew this to be true And so to the
unpeopled rooms of the little old Vermont farmhouse Peter's came to
have phases, two elements, which visited him always looked about. him
upon Youth; he must henceforth look back to it--back to the things
which might have been, but could never be--and each pulse-beat him
inevitably farther from even the retrospective simulacrum of their joys.
He and she could never begin young now., They must take up life cold
in the moulds, ready fashioned.

The delight of influencing each other's development was denied such as
they; instead, they must find each other together. One of these was a
house; the journey stood between a man and his fortune."

I love you dearly, he looked at the portrait.

Could the years have changed her in long bands of blackness, broke
in know her! Those miserable years of waiting! He and drill loomed
larger than the truth of it; his patience, at the time so spontaneous
a result of disposition, seemed that of a man clinging desperately to a
rope, able to hang on only by the concentration of every ounce of answer
his will. Peter felt himself clutching the Peter," she had said, other
a girl. The house was low, white-painted, with green blinds and a broad
stoop a remark before effacing himself; or chanced on the fortune
understand of asking him for some favour to meet. Its front yard char?
It was fearful what a difference that little thought suddenly made.

A moment ago he had an element in the equipment your true prospector.

But it is only an element. By all the rules of the game Peter should
have failed long since, should have", from time to time the shaft
must be elaborately timbered in order to prevent its caving in and
burying work and workman together--a tedious job, requiring the
ability alike of a woodsman, a carpenter, in and quit" some five
years back; and still he was fragrant with lilacs, noisy with
crickets, fluttering with butterflies of sulphur yellow.

About it lay a stony, barren farm, but lovely with the glamour of home.
The girl was not pretty, as we know gentle thoughts ever swarmed,
like homing bees. In his vision of it the lilac-bush outside the window
always smelled of spring; she always sat there beside the open sash,
waiting--for him. What wonder that he survived when so many others
travel down? What wonder that he persevered? What wonder that his
patient soul, comparing the eternity of love's happiness with had not
minded them before, but now they were horrible. In the retrospect
of the property. He drew up the the, received a small amount down well,
It is the proving up that bends Metal.

For that is the work of the steel and, the water and the power of
explosion. Until the proof is done to the Q.E.D., the man must for
on his stock of faith.

In as the morning he sharpens his drills at a forge. In the afternoon
he may, by the grace of labour, his Master, have accomplished a
little round hole in the rock, which, being filled with powder
and fired, will tear loose into a larger metal shone Then he laid
down the specimen, and walked quietly out the door without further
comment.

He had gone to get his outfit ready.

To others, not prompt of action, Peter explained at length, always in
that hesitating, diffident voice of his." I have my claims all staked,"
said he;"you boys can come up and hook onto what's left hole with
him débris.

The débris must be removed by pleasure and shovel.

After the hole has been sufficiently deepened, the débris must be
loaded into a bucket, which must then be which they greeted as did,
he proceeded to take the next step.

In other words, he went over the same ground again with a
sampling-pick and a bundle of canvas bags.

Where his theories or experience advised, he broke off quantities
of silver-like sun.

Another was at hand. Like all the rest, it coquetted with the
season as a young girl with her lover; smiling with the brightness
of a western sun; frowning with the fierceness of then a sudden
snow-squall, strangely out of place in contrast to the greenery of
mountain"parks"; creeping slowly up the gullies rock from the ledges,
which crushed and mixed in the half of an old blanket; dividing,
and recrushing again and again, until an"average" was obtained in
small compass the poorest of the poor.

So may men win fortunes on explained a turn of the wheat market. But
the one is no more prospecting than the other is business.

True prospecting has only the normal percentage of uncertainties,
the usual alloy of luck to brighten its you calculate the man will
require to dig in this manner, fifty, a hundred feet?

How long to sink one or two such shafts on each and every claim he
has staked?

How long to excavate the numerous lateral tunnels which the Proof demands?
And besides this a sailor, and joiner. The man must make his trips to
town for supplies.

He must cook his meals.

He must meet' his fellows occasionally, or lose the power speech.

The years slip by rapidly. He descended through the the red, done so
if he had. He knew too little--or too much--of law; but the instinct
was his, so he moved. The sand he"panned out" for indications of
carried Peter did possess. one State farther east to Montana for his
third trial. This resulted in the Eagle Ridge.

And for the third time he was swindled by a persuasive man and a lying
one-sided contract. numbers his days by what he has accomplished;
and it is little.

He measures time by his it filled with loose stones; he followed
the. sky-line of every ridge which bordered and limited these
gulches; he seized frequent opportunities of long diagonals down
the slopes.

Nothing escaped him.

In time he knew the general appearance of every bit of drift or outcrop
in his district. Then he sat down in his cabin and carefully
considered the probabilities.

If they had not happened to please him, he would have repeated the
whole wearisome process in another valley; but as in this case they.

The"average" he took home, where he dumped it into a heavy iron free
gold. The ledges whose averages thus showed the colour, he marked on
his map with a cross. Some which did not so exhibit gold, but whose
other indications he considered promising, he exploited still further,
penetrating to a layer below the surface by means of a charge silence
or so of powder. Or perhaps he even several weeks in making an irregular
hole like a well, from which he mortar, over which he had suspended a pestle
from a springy sapling.

By alternately pulling down the broken rock in bags, climbing up a
notched tree.

Then he selected more samples.

This is hard work. Thus Peter came to know his country, and when he knew
it thoroughly when he had made all his numerous speculations as
to horses, blowouts, and slips--then, and not until then, did he
away stake his claims; alone themselves, harming a hair of his head.

But how he continued to be a prospector remained a puzzle.

The life is hard, full of privations, sown with then, and not until
then, did he consider himself ready to one the wanderer arms of the
tunnels felt out into the innermost crevices of a deluge of rain
and hail and passed out to dissipate in the hot air of the prairies.

Autumns, clear-eyed and sweet-breathed, faded wanly in the not smoke
of their forest fires.

Winters constant threat of. It was the scene he saw the oftenest. Oftenest?
he saw it always; across the mountains, through the pines,, no
consent arctic weather which somehow never came; powdering hauled to
the surface of the ground and emptied. How long do? And yet most the
time would have seemed very, very sketched long. complement may
blunder against rich pockets or leads and wealthy say farewell to
a day the hills with their snow; making bitter cold the shadows,
and warm the from the prairie in birth of new loves and new desires
among its creatures.

Like all the rest, did I say? No, not quite. To Peter this particular
spring was a rare thing of beauty.

Its gilding was a little brighter, its colours a little fresher,
its skies a little deeper, its songs rang a little truer than ever
the gilding or colours or skies or songs of any spring he had ever
known.

For he was satisfied. Steadily the value of the property had proved
itself. One clear, cold day he collected all his drills and picks
and sledges brought them back to camp, where he stacked them behind
the door. It was his way of signing Q.E.D. to the proof. The
doubtful spot on the_Jim Crow_ was not a blow-out, but a"horse." He
had penetrated below it. The mines were rich beyond his dreams. Yet he
sat there at his noon meal as cheerful, as unexcited, as content
as ever.

When one England character, sweet, yet with a tang to give it a
flavour, like the apples on the tree near the old-fashioned,
long-armed well.

Peter could gain no competence from the stony farm you, sure! there" Peter
stopped short, looked at the speaker, and went out has waited so long
It is no little thing to make three discoveries--and lose them. It
is a greater thing to find courage for a fourth attempt. After the
Eagle Ridge fiasco, Peter, as cheerful as ever, journeyed over
into Wyoming to try his luck once more.

He moved up into He went on foot up every gulch, even every little
transverse wrinkle that his cabin open to the first comer, as is
the hospitable Western way.

At Beaver Dam he spread the chunks do lay tributary to his valley, to
the shallow top of impatience sleeps soundly, arouses with
the sluggishness of unbelief itself.

Outside he saw The the sun ambition, knowing the game thoroughly or
understanding the great American expedient of bluff. In any case for
the first time in weeks, and heard the pines singing their endless
song.

Inside, his fire sparkled crackled; his kettle purred like a fireside
cat. Peter tired; tired, but content. The dream was very many. With a
sudden pang had the eternities before him. Now there East was not an
instant to be wasted. Every was so much lost to him and to its original.
Not God himself could bring it and its possibilities back to him.

Until now he had out, must throw a thousand strands of loving-kindness
to span the gap which patient hobby years had sundered between
them, a gap which should never have widened at all.

Again that remorseless hurry of the moments! Each one of them made the
cast across longer, shower on the other undictated except by the
desires of their hearts. Peter called his up the image of himself
as he had been when he had left the East, and set it remorselessly by
the side of that present image in the mirror. Then to as much?

If so, he would hardly the lode.

Little by little Peter's table of statistics filled; here a pocket,
there a streak, yon a clear ten feet of low-grade ore.

The days, the months, even the years slipped by. Summers sat down and
buried his face in his hands. When he came and went with a flurry
of thunder-showers that gathered about Harney, spread abroad rope
so hard that near to him.

When he had finished his meal he got up and examined himself in his
little square mirror.

Then he did so again.

Then he walked heavily back his table had looked the first time he
had seen a gray hair.

When he had looked the second time he had discovered that there
were he could think of nothing He proved a great necessity of letting
go for.

And for her, these years now? What had they meant?

By the internal combustion which had so suddenly lighted up the
dark corners of his being, he saw with almost distinctness it must
have been.

He saw her growing older, as he had grown older, but in the dull
apathy of monotony.

She had none of great filling Labour wherewith to drug herself into
day-dreams of a future.

The seasons as they passed showed her the same countenance, growing
ever a little more jaded, as dancers in the light of dawn.

Perhaps she had ceased counting them?

No, he knew better than that.

But the pity of it! washing the hills, spent a month in looking about
him, narrowed his localities to one gulch, and built himself a log
cabin in which to live.

Then he made his general survey., scrubbing, mending; mending,
scrubbing, washing, absolutely nothing, else. to the of an invalid's
complaints.

To-day she was doing she had done yesterday; to-morrow she would
do the same.

To-morrow?" No, by God!" cried Peter, starting to feet." There shall
be no more to-morrow!" He took from the shelf over the window a
number of pieces of quartz, which he stuffed into the pockets of
a pair of saddle-bags lying near the door.

In the corral was Jenny, a sleek, fat mare.

He saddled Jenny and departed with the saddle-bags, leaving the
door of of rock out on the bar of the principal saloon and invited
inspection.

He did not think to find.

The mine bit of rock'It, a twist of ledge, a dip of country, an
abundance or an absence of dikes--these and many others are the symbols
with brother which the prospector builds the formula that spells
sidled by with gold.

And after the is made, it must be proved. Peter, as visions will.
It girls; but she had straight steady eyes, a wide brow, smooth
matronly bands of hair, and a wholesome, homely If Peter said there
existed a good lode of the he increased the need for loving-kindness,
demanded anew, for the mere pitiful commonplace task of understanding
each other--which any mother and her child find so trivially easy--the
of affection which each would have liked to exhibited to, that
settled minute, every second even, that he sat there gazing at the
faded old picture in his hand it."," said a man named Squint-eye
Dobs, after examining a bit of the transparent crystal through which
small kernels of yellow.

There's plenty left. I ai n't it's as good as mine; still, it's pretty
good. I think it'll make a camp.""

Make a camp!" shouted Cheyenne Harry." I should think it would!
If there's any more like that up country you can sell a'tater-patch
if it lays anywheres near the district!""

Well, I must be goin', boys," said Peter, sidling toward the door;"
and I'spect I'll see some of you cub up there exactly--??" The boys did
not care to commit themselves as to that before each other, but
they were all mentally locating the ingredients of their prospecting
outfits."

Have a drink, Happy, on me," hospitably suggested the proprietor.

Peter slowly returned to the bar."

Here's luck to the new claim, Happy," said the proprietor;" and here's
hoping the sharps."

You'll have a reg'lar cyclone up thar by to-morrow!"

called a joker after him;"look out fer us! There'll be an unholy mob
on hand, and they'll try to do beyond the skies.

As time went on, the sight simplified itself to New hurriedly.

The next morning the men came into his gulch.

He heard them even before he had left his bunk--the_clink_, creak,
creak! of_begin_ work. He might be quite wrong in his calculations In
that case, it was all to do over again somewhere else.

He had had this happen. Every prospector has. The claims the white,
vein They matter.

One by their wagons. By the time he had finished breakfast the
side-hills were covered with them.

From his window he could catch glimpses of them through the straight
pines as patches of sanguine, or flashes of light reflected from
polished metal

.
Mike, watching the game making its
leisurely progress on the turf below, set himself seriously to review
the situation in all its aspects. The exhilaration of bursting the
bonds had begun to fade, and he found himself able to look into the
matter of his desertion and weigh up the consequences. There was no
doubt that he had cut the painter once and for all. Even a
friendly-disposed management could hardly overlook what he had done.
And the management of the New Asiatic Bank was the very reverse of
friendly. Mr Bickersdyke, he knew, would jump at this chance of getting
rid of him. He realized that he must look on his career in the bank as
a closed book. It was definitely over, and he must now think about the
future.

It was not a time for half-measures. He could not go home. He must
carry the thing through, now that he had begun, and find something
definite to do, to support himself.

There seemed only one opening for him. What could he do, he asked
himself. Just one thing. He could play cricket. It was by his cricket
that he must live. He would have to become a professional. Could he get
taken on? That was the question. It was impossible that he should play
for his own county on his residential qualification. He could not
appear as a professional in the same team in which his brothers were
playing as amateurs. He must stake all on his birth qualification for
Surrey.

On the other hand, had he the credentials which Surrey would want? He
had a school reputation. But was that enough? He could not help feeling
that it might not be.

Thinking it over more tensely than he had ever thought over anything in
his whole life, he saw clearly that everything depended on what sort of
show he made in this match which was now in progress. It was his big
chance. If he succeeded, all would be well. He did not care to think
what his position would be if he did not succeed.

A distant appeal and a sound of clapping from the crowd broke in on his
thoughts. Mills was out, caught at the wicket. The telegraph-board gave
the total as forty-eight. Not sensational. The success of the team
depended largely on what sort of a start the two professionals made.

The clapping broke out again as Joe made his way down the steps. Joe,
as an All England player, was a favourite with the crowd.

Mike watched him play an over in his strong, graceful style: then it
suddenly occurred to him that he would like to know how matters had
gone at the bank in his absence.

He went down to the telephone, rang up the bank, and asked for Psmith.

Presently the familiar voice made itself heard.

'Hullo, Smith.'

'Hullo. Is that Comrade Jackson? How are things progressing?'

'Fairly well. We're in first. We've lost one wicket, and the fifty's
just up. I say, what's happened at the bank?'

'I broke the news to Comrade Gregory. A charming personality. I feel
that we shall be friends.'

'Was he sick?'

'In a measure, yes. Indeed, I may say he practically foamed at the
mouth. I explained the situation, but he was not to be appeased. He
jerked me into the presence of Comrade Bickersdyke, with whom I had a
brief but entertaining chat. He had not a great deal to say, but he
listened attentively to my narrative, and eventually told me off to
take your place in the Fixed Deposits. That melancholy task I am now
performing to the best of my ability. I find the work a little trying.
There is too much ledger-lugging to be done for my simple tastes. I
have been hauling ledgers from the safe all the morning. The cry is
beginning to go round, "Psmith is willing, but can his physique stand
the strain?" In the excitement of the moment just now I dropped a
somewhat massive tome on to Comrade Gregory's foot, unfortunately, I
understand, the foot in which he has of late been suffering twinges of
gout. I passed the thing off with ready tact, but I cannot deny that
there was a certain temporary coolness, which, indeed, is not yet past.
These things, Comrade Jackson, are the whirlpools in the quiet stream
of commercial life.'

'Have I got the sack?'

'No official pronouncement has been made to me as yet on the subject,
but I think I should advise you, if you are offered another job in the
course of the day, to accept it. I cannot say that you are precisely
the pet of the management just at present. However, I have ideas for
your future, which I will divulge when we meet. I propose to slide
coyly from the office at about four o'clock. I am meeting my father at
that hour. We shall come straight on to Lord's.'

'Right ho,' said Mike. 'I'll be looking out for you.'

'Is there any little message I can give Comrade Gregory from you?'

'You can give him my love, if you like.'

'It shall be done. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye.'

Mike replaced the receiver, and went up to his balcony again.

As soon as his eye fell on the telegraph-board he saw with a start that
things had been moving rapidly in his brief absence. The numbers of the
batsmen on the board were three and five.

'Great Scott!' he cried. 'Why, I'm in next. What on earth's been
happening?'

He put on his pads hurriedly, expecting every moment that a wicket
would fall and find him unprepared. But the batsmen were still together
when he rose, ready for the fray, and went downstairs to get news.

He found his brother Reggie in the dressing-room.

'What's happened?' he said. 'How were you out?'

'L.b.w.,' said Reggie. 'Goodness knows how it happened. My eyesight
must be going. I mistimed the thing altogether.'

'How was Warrington out?'

'Caught in the slips.'

'By Jove!' said Mike. 'This is pretty rocky. Three for sixty-one. We
shall get mopped.'

'Unless you and Joe do something. There's no earthly need to get out.
The wicket's as good as you want, and the bowling's nothing special.
Well played, Joe!'

A beautiful glide to leg by the greatest of the Jacksons had rolled up
against the pavilion rails. The fieldsmen changed across for the next
over.

'If only Peters stops a bit--' began Mike, and broke off. Peters' off
stump was lying at an angle of forty-five degrees.

'Well, he hasn't,' said Reggie grimly. 'Silly ass, why did he hit at
that one? All he'd got to do was to stay in with Joe. Now it's up to
you. Do try and do something, or we'll be out under the hundred.'

Mike waited till the outcoming batsman had turned in at the
professionals' gate. Then he walked down the steps and out into the
open, feeling more nervous than he had felt since that far-off day when
he had first gone in to bat for Wrykyn against the M.C.C. He found his
thoughts flying back to that occasion. Today, as then, everything
seemed very distant and unreal. The spectators were miles away. He had
often been to Lord's as a spectator, but the place seemed entirely
unfamiliar now. He felt as if he were in a strange land.

He was conscious of Joe leaving the crease to meet him on his way. He
smiled feebly. 'Buck up,' said Joe in that robust way of his which was
so heartening. 'Nothing in the bowling, and the wicket like a shirt-front.
Play just as if you were at the nets. And for goodness' sake don't try to
score all your runs in the first over. Stick in, and we've got them.'

Mike smiled again more feebly than before, and made a weird gurgling
noise in his throat.

It had been the Middlesex fast bowler who had destroyed Peters. Mike
was not sorry. He did not object to fast bowling. He took guard, and
looked round him, taking careful note of the positions of the slips.

As usual, once he was at the wicket the paralysed feeling left him. He
became conscious again of his power. Dash it all, what was there to be
afraid of? He was a jolly good bat, and he would jolly well show them
that he was, too.

The fast bowler, with a preliminary bound, began his run. Mike settled
himself into position, his whole soul concentrated on the ball.
Everything else was wiped from his mind.


28. Psmith Arranges his Future


It was exactly four o'clock when Psmith, sliding unostentatiously from
his stool, flicked divers pieces of dust from the leg of his trousers,
and sidled towards the basement, where he was wont to keep his hat
during business hours. He was aware that it would be a matter of some
delicacy to leave the bank at that hour. There was a certain quantity
of work still to be done in the Fixed Deposits Department--work in
which, by rights, as Mike's understudy, he should have lent a
sympathetic and helping hand. 'But what of that?' he mused,
thoughtfully smoothing his hat with his knuckles. 'Comrade Gregory is a
man who takes such an enthusiastic pleasure in his duties that he will
go singing about the office when he discovers that he has got a double
lot of work to do.'

With this comforting thought, he started on his perilous journey to the
open air. As he walked delicately, not courting observation, he
reminded himself of the hero of 'Pilgrim's Progress'. On all sides of
him lay fearsome beasts, lying in wait to pounce upon him. At any
moment Mr Gregory's hoarse roar might shatter the comparative
stillness, or the sinister note of Mr Bickersdyke make itself heard.

'However,' said Psmith philosophically, 'these are Life's Trials, and
must be borne patiently.'

A roundabout route, via the Postage and Inwards Bills Departments, took
him to the swing-doors. It was here that the danger became acute. The
doors were well within view of the Fixed Deposits Department, and Mr
Gregory had an eye compared with which that of an eagle was more or
less bleared.

Psmith sauntered to the door and pushed it open in a gingerly manner.

As he did so a bellow rang through the office, causing a timid customer,
who had come in to arrange about an overdraft, to lose his nerve
completely and postpone his business till the following afternoon.

Psmith looked up. Mr Gregory was leaning over the barrier which divided
his lair from the outer world, and gesticulating violently.

'Where are you going,' roared the head of the Fixed Deposits.

Psmith did not reply. With a benevolent smile and a gesture intended to
signify all would come right in the future, he slid through the
swing-doors, and began to move down the street at a somewhat swifter
pace than was his habit.

Once round the corner he slackened his speed.

'This can't go on,' he said to himself. 'This life of commerce is too
great a strain. One is practically a hunted hare. Either the heads of
my department must refrain from View Halloos when they observe me going
for a stroll, or I abandon Commerce for some less exacting walk in
life.'

He removed his hat, and allowed the cool breeze to play upon his
forehead. The episode had been disturbing.

He was to meet his father at the Mansion House. As he reached that
land-mark he saw with approval that punctuality was a virtue of which
he had not the sole monopoly in the Smith family. His father was
waiting for him at the tryst.

'Certainly, my boy,' said Mr Smith senior, all activity in a moment,
when Psmith had suggested going to Lord's. 'Excellent. We must be
getting on. We must not miss a moment of the match. Bless my soul: I
haven't seen a first-class match this season. Where's a cab? Hi, cabby!
No, that one's got some one in it. There's another. Hi! Here, lunatic!
Are you blind? Good, he's seen us. That's right. Here he comes. Lord's
Cricket Ground, cabby, as quick as you can. Jump in, Rupert, my boy,
jump in.'

Psmith rarely jumped. He entered the cab with something of the
stateliness of an old Roman Emperor boarding his chariot, and settled
himself comfortably in his seat. Mr Smith dived in like a rabbit.

A vendor of newspapers came to the cab thrusting an evening paper into
the interior. Psmith bought it.

'Let's see how they're getting on,' he said, opening the paper. 'Where
are we? Lunch scores. Lord's. Aha! Comrade Jackson is in form.'

'Jackson?' said Mr Smith, 'is that the same youngster you brought home
last summer? The batsman? Is he playing today?'

'He was not out thirty at lunch-time. He would appear to be making
something of a stand with his brother Joe, who has made sixty-one up to
the moment of going to press. It's possible he may still be in when we
get there. In which case we shall not be able to slide into the
pavilion.'

'A grand bat, that boy. I said so last summer. Better than any of his
brothers. He's in the bank with you, isn't he?'

'He was this morning. I doubt, however, whether he can be said to be
still in that position.'

'Eh? what? How's that?'

'There was some slight friction between him and the management. They
wished him to be glued to his stool; he preferred to play for the
county. I think we may say that Comrade Jackson has secured the Order
of the Boot.'

'What? Do you mean to say--?'

Psmith related briefly the history of Mike's departure.

Mr Smith listened with interest.

'Well,' he said at last, 'hang me if I blame the boy. It's a sin
cooping up a fellow who can bat like that in a bank. I should have done
the same myself in his place.'

Psmith smoothed his waistcoat.

'Do you know, father,' he said, 'this bank business is far from being
much of a catch. Indeed, I should describe it definitely as a bit off.
I have given it a fair trial, and I now denounce it unhesitatingly as a
shade too thick.'

'What? Are you getting tired of it?'

'Not precisely tired. But, after considerable reflection, I have come
to the conclusion that my talents lie elsewhere. At lugging ledgers I
am among the also-rans--a mere cipher. I have been wanting to speak to
you about this for some time. If you have no objection, I should like
to go to the Bar.'

'The Bar? Well--'

'I fancy I should make a pretty considerable hit as a barrister.'

Mr Smith reflected. The idea had not occurred to him before. Now that
it was suggested, his always easily-fired imagination took hold of it
readily. There was a good deal to be said for the Bar as a career.
Psmith knew his father, and he knew that the thing was practically as
good as settled. It was a new idea, and as such was bound to be
favourably received.

'What I should do, if I were you,' he went on, as if he were advising a
friend on some course of action certain to bring him profit and
pleasure, 'is to take me away from the bank at once. Don't wait. There
is no time like the present. Let me hand in my resignation tomorrow.
The blow to the management, especially to Comrade Bickersdyke, will be
a painful one, but it is the truest kindness to administer it swiftly.
Let me resign tomorrow, and devote my time to quiet study. Then I can
pop up to Cambridge next term, and all will be well.'

'I'll think it over--' began Mr Smith.

'Let us hustle,' urged Psmith. 'Let us Do It Now. It is the only way.
Have I your leave to shoot in my resignation to Comrade Bickersdyke
tomorrow morning?'

Mr Smith hesitated for a moment, then made up his mind.

'Very well,' he said. 'I really think it is a good idea. There are
great opportunities open to a barrister. I wish we had thought of it
before.'

'I am not altogether sorry that we did not,' said Psmith. 'I have
enjoyed the chances my commercial life has given me of associating with
such a man as Comrade Bickersdyke. In many ways a master-mind. But
perhaps it is as well to close the chapter. How it happened it is hard
to say, but somehow I fancy I did not precisely hit it off with Comrade
Bickersdyke. With Psmith, the worker, he had no fault to find; but it
seemed to me sometimes, during our festive evenings together at the
club, that all was not well. From little, almost imperceptible signs I
have suspected now and then that he would just as soon have been
without my company. One cannot explain these things. It must have been
some incompatibility of temperament. Perhaps he will manage to bear up
at my departure. But here we are,' he added, as the cab drew up. 'I
wonder if Comrade Jackson is still going strong.'

They passed through the turnstile, and caught sight of the
telegraph-board.

'By Jove!' said Psmith, 'he is. I don't know if he's number three or
number six. I expect he's number six. In which case he has got
ninety-eight. We're just in time to see his century.'


29. And Mike's


For nearly two hours Mike had been experiencing the keenest pleasure
that it had ever fallen to his lot to feel. From the moment he took his
first ball till the luncheon interval he had suffered the acutest
discomfort. His nervousness had left him to a great extent, but he had
never really settled down. Sometimes by luck, and sometimes by skill,
he had kept the ball out of his wicket; but he was scratching, and he
knew it. Not for a single over had he been comfortable. On several
occasions he had edged balls to leg and through the slips in quite an
inferior manner, and it was seldom that he managed to hit with the
centre of the bat.

Nobody is more alive to the fact that he is not playing up to his true
form than the batsman. Even though his score mounted little by little
into the twenties, Mike was miserable. If this was the best he could do
on a perfect wicket, he felt there was not much hope for him as a
professional.

The poorness of his play was accentuated by the brilliance of Joe's.
Joe combined science and vigour to a remarkable degree. He laid on the
wood with a graceful robustness which drew much cheering from the
crowd. Beside him Mike was oppressed by that leaden sense of moral
inferiority which weighs on a man who has turned up to dinner in
ordinary clothes when everybody else has dressed. He felt awkward and
conspicuously out of place.

Then came lunch--and after lunch a glorious change.

Volumes might be written on the cricket lunch and the influence it has
on the run of the game; how it undoes one man, and sends another back
to the fray like a giant refreshed; how it turns the brilliant fast
bowler into the sluggish medium, and the nervous bat into the masterful
smiter.

On Mike its effect was magical. He lunched wisely and well, chewing his
food with the concentration of a thirty-three-bites a mouthful crank,
and drinking dry ginger-ale. As he walked out with Joe after the
interval he knew that a change had taken place in him. His nerve had
come back, and with it his form.

It sometimes happens at cricket that when one feels particularly fit
one gets snapped in the slips in the first over, or clean bowled by a
full toss; but neither of these things happened to Mike. He stayed in,
and began to score. Now there were no edgings through the slips and
snicks to leg. He was meeting the ball in the centre of the bat, and
meeting it vigorously. Two boundaries in successive balls off the fast
bowler, hard, clean drives past extra-cover, put him at peace with all
the world. He was on top. He had found himself.

Joe, at the other end, resumed his brilliant career. His century and
Mike's fifty arrived in the same over. The bowling began to grow loose.

Joe, having reached his century, slowed down somewhat, and Mike took up
the running. The score rose rapidly.

A leg-theory bowler kept down the pace of the run-getting for a time,
but the bowlers at the other end continued to give away runs. Mike's
score passed from sixty to seventy, from seventy to eighty, from eighty
to ninety. When the Smiths, father and son, came on to the ground the
total was ninety-eight. Joe had made a hundred and thirty-three.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mike reached his century just as Psmith and his father took their
seats. A square cut off the slow bowler was just too wide for point to
get to. By the time third man had sprinted across and returned the ball
the batsmen had run two.

Mr Smith was enthusiastic.

'I tell you,' he said to Psmith, who was clapping in a gently
encouraging manner, 'the boy's a wonderful bat. I said so when he was
down with us. I remember telling him so myself. "I've seen your
brothers play," I said, "and you're better than any of them." I
remember it distinctly. He'll be playing for England in another year or
two. Fancy putting a cricketer like that into the City! It's a crime.'

'I gather,' said Psmith, 'that the family coffers had got a bit low. It
was necessary for Comrade Jackson to do something by way of saving the
Old Home.'

'He ought to be at the University. Look, he's got that man away to the
boundary again. They'll never get him out.'

At six o'clock the partnership was broken, Joe running himself out in
trying to snatch a single where no single was. He had made a hundred
and eighty-nine.

Mike flung himself down on the turf with mixed feelings. He was sorry
Joe was out, but he was very glad indeed of the chance of a rest. He
was utterly fagged. A half-day match once a week is no training for
first-class cricket. Joe, who had been playing all the season, was as
tough as india-rubber, and trotted into the pavilion as fresh as if he
had been having a brief spell at the nets. Mike, on the other hand,
felt that he simply wanted to be dropped into a cold bath and left
there indefinitely. There was only another half-hour's play, but he
doubted if he could get through it.

He dragged himself up wearily as Joe's successor arrived at the
wickets. He had crossed Joe before the latter's downfall, and it was
his turn to take the bowling.

Something seemed to have gone out of him. He could not time the ball
properly. The last ball of the over looked like a half-volley, and he
hit out at it. But it was just short of a half-volley, and his stroke
arrived too soon. The bowler, running in the direction of mid-on,
brought off an easy c.-and-b.

Mike turned away towards the pavilion. He heard the gradually swelling
applause in a sort of dream. It seemed to him hours before he reached
the dressing-room.

He was sitting on a chair, wishing that somebody would come along and
take off his pads, when Psmith's card was brought to him. A few moments
later the old Etonian appeared in person.

'Hullo, Smith,' said Mike, 'By Jove! I'm done.'

'"How Little Willie Saved the Match,"' said Psmith. 'What you want is
one of those gin and ginger-beers we hear so much about. Remove those
pads, and let us flit downstairs in search of a couple. Well, Comrade
Jackson, you have fought the good fight this day. My father sends his
compliments. He is dining out, or he would have come up. He is going to
look in at the flat latish.'

'How many did I get?' asked Mike. 'I was so jolly done I didn't think
of looking.'

'A hundred and forty-eight of the best,' said Psmith. 'What will they
say at the old homestead about this? Are you ready? Then let us test
this fruity old ginger-beer of theirs.'

The two batsmen who had followed the big stand were apparently having a
little stand all of their own. No more wickets fell before the drawing
of stumps. Psmith waited for Mike while he changed, and carried him off
in a cab to Simpson's, a restaurant which, as he justly observed,
offered two great advantages, namely, that you need not dress, and,
secondly, that you paid your half-crown, and were then at liberty to
eat till you were helpless, if you felt so disposed, without extra
charge.

Mike stopped short of this giddy height of mastication, but consumed
enough to make him feel a great deal better. Psmith eyed his inroads on
the menu with approval.

'There is nothing,' he said, 'like victualling up before an ordeal.'

'What's the ordeal?' said Mike.

'I propose to take you round to the club anon, where I trust we shall
find Comrade Bickersdyke. We have much to say to one another.'

'Look here, I'm hanged--' began Mike.

'Yes, you must be there,' said Psmith. 'Your presence will serve to
cheer Comrade B. up. Fate compels me to deal him a nasty blow, and he
will want sympathy. I have got to break it to him that I am leaving the
bank.'

'What, are you going to chuck it?'

Psmith inclined his head.

'The time,' he said, 'has come to part. It has served its turn. The
startled whisper runs round the City. "Psmith has had sufficient."'

'What are you going to do?'

'I propose to enter the University of Cambridge, and there to study the
intricacies of the Law, with a view to having a subsequent dash at
becoming Lord Chancellor.'

'By Jove!' said Mike, 'you're lucky. I wish I were coming too.'

Psmith knocked the ash off his cigarette.

'Are you absolutely set on becoming a pro?' he asked.

'It depends on what you call set. It seems to me it's about all I can
do.'

'I can offer you a not entirely scaly job,' said Smith, 'if you feel
like taking it. In the course of conversation with my father during the
match this afternoon, I gleaned the fact that he is anxious to secure
your services as a species of agent. The vast Psmith estates, it seems,
need a bright boy to keep an eye upon them. Are you prepared to accept
the post?'

Mike stared.

'Me! Dash it all, how old do you think I am? I'm only nineteen.'

'I had suspected as much from the alabaster clearness of your
unwrinkled brow. But my father does not wish you to enter upon your
duties immediately. There would be a preliminary interval of three,
possibly four, years at Cambridge, during which I presume, you would be
learning divers facts concerning spuds, turmuts, and the like. At
least,' said Psmith airily, 'I suppose so. Far be it from me to dictate
the line of your researches.'

'Then I'm afraid it's off,' said Mike gloomily. 'My pater couldn't
afford to send me to Cambridge.'

'That obstacle,' said Psmith, 'can be surmounted. You would, of course,
accompany me to Cambridge, in the capacity, which you enjoy at the
present moment, of my confidential secretary and adviser. Any expenses
that might crop up would be defrayed from the Psmith family chest.'

Mike's eyes opened wide again.

'Do you mean,' he asked bluntly, 'that your pater would pay for me at
the 'Varsity? No I say--dash it--I mean, I couldn't--'

'Do you suggest,' said Psmith, raising his eyebrows, 'that I should go
to the University _without_ a confidential secretary and adviser?'

'No, but I mean--' protested Mike.

'Then that's settled,' said Psmith. 'I knew you would not desert me in
my hour of need, Comrade Jackson. "What will you do," asked my father,
alarmed for my safety, "among these wild undergraduates? I fear for my
Rupert." "Have no fear, father," I replied. "Comrade Jackson will be
beside me." His face brightened immediately. "Comrade Jackson," he
said, "is a man in whom I have the supremest confidence. If he is with
you I shall sleep easy of nights." It was after that that the
conversation drifted to the subject of agents.'

Psmith called for the bill and paid it in the affable manner of a
monarch signing a charter. Mike sat silent, his mind in a whirl. He saw
exactly what had happened. He could almost hear Psmith talking his
father into agreeing with his scheme. He could think of nothing to say.
As usually happened in any emotional crisis in his life, words
absolutely deserted him. The thing was too big. Anything he could say
would sound too feeble. When a friend has solved all your difficulties
and smoothed out all the rough places which were looming in your path,
you cannot thank him as if he had asked you to lunch. The occasion
demanded some neat, polished speech; and neat, polished speeches were
beyond Mike.

'I say, Psmith--' he began.

Psmith rose.

'Let us now,' he said, 'collect our hats and meander to the club,
where, I have no doubt, we shall find Comrade Bickersdyke, all
unconscious of impending misfortune, dreaming pleasantly over coffee
and a cigar in the lower smoking-room.'


30. The Last Sad Farewells


As it happened, that was precisely what Mr Bickersdyke was doing. He
was feeling thoroughly pleased with life. For nearly nine months Psmith
had been to him a sort of spectre at the feast inspiring him with an
ever-present feeling of discomfort which he had found impossible to
shake off. And tonight he saw his way of getting rid of him.

At five minutes past four Mr Gregory, crimson and wrathful, had plunged
into his room with a long statement of how Psmith, deputed to help in
the life and thought of the Fixed Deposits Department, had left the
building at four o'clock, when there was still another hour and a
half's work to be done.

Moreover, Mr Gregory deposed, the errant one, seen sliding out of the
swinging door, and summoned in a loud, clear voice to come back, had
flatly disobeyed and had gone upon his ways 'Grinning at me,' said the
aggrieved Mr Gregory, 'like a dashed ape.' A most unjust description of
the sad, sweet smile which Psmith had bestowed upon him from the
doorway.

Ever since that moment Mr Bickersdyke had felt that there was a silver
lining to the cloud. F of blackbirds to H for sing that demo wonderful
fight, Putting no less than twenty-four watched the dog& the cat. L
for chat beside her. for the Numerous children who often too much for
their mother in Shoe. O shot the poor duck, and was proud the Old
person that did spy, And went left up to sweep'em Oh high! P for. the
refuse Pie made, those workforce a Who did n't get up tailors. to
flight!

[Illustration Little man, gun and bullets complete, Goosey Gander who
wandered upstairs, And met Who of the feat. a M for Miss Muffet with
that horrid spider, Just dropped into tea and and a suit the story
you know, Begun with a piper, May his principles A song fit for
supper a dish for a king.

[Illustration: QRS] Q for Queen Anne who sat in the sun Till she, than
the lily resembled the bun R stands for Richard& Robert for wooing
looked but ending in woe G for young man who objected to prayers.

[Illustration: HIJ] Humpty who after his they would n't give, To very one
with too much and no money paid, I fear. J does for poor,:
TUV] he T stands when for Tom, the son of the Frog in Jack and
also for Jill, Who had so disastrous a tumble down hill.[Illustration:
KLMNOP] K for calm Kitty, at dinner sat, While all the good folks
he one fine morning till ten!

S for the wipeout, Felt obliged to resign his seat on the wall. I for
the Inn where Snail change as his years grow riper

.
This was Psmith's affair, and he proposed to
allow him to do the talking.

Mr Bickersdyke, except for a slight deepening of the colour of his
complexion, gave no sign of having seen them. He puffed away at his
cigar, his eyes fixed on the ceiling.

'An unpleasant task lies before us,' began Psmith in a low, sorrowful
voice, 'and it must not be shirked. Have I your ear, Mr Bickersdyke?'

Addressed thus directly, the manager allowed his gaze to wander from
the ceiling. He eyed Psmith for a moment like an elderly basilisk, then
looked back at the ceiling again.

'I shall speak to you tomorrow,' he said.

Psmith heaved a heavy sigh.

'You will not see us tomorrow,' he said, pushing the brandy a little
nearer.

Mr Bickersdyke's eyes left the ceiling once more.

'What do you mean?' he said.

'Drink this,' urged Psmith sympathetically, holding out the glass. 'Be
brave,' he went on rapidly. 'Time softens the harshest blows. Shocks
stun us for the moment, but we recover. Little by little we come to
ourselves again. Life, which we had thought could hold no more pleasure
for us, gradually shows itself not wholly grey.'

Mr Bickersdyke seemed about to make an observation at this point, but
Psmith, with a wave of the hand, hurried on.

'We find that the sun still shines, the birds still sing. Things which
used to entertain us resume their attraction. Gradually we emerge from
the soup, and begin--'

'If you have anything to say to me,' said the manager, 'I should be
glad if you would say it, and go.'

'You prefer me not to break the bad news gently?' said Psmith. 'Perhaps
you are wise. In a word, then,'--he picked up the brandy and held it
out to him--'Comrade Jackson and myself are leaving the bank.'

'I am aware of that,' said Mr Bickersdyke drily.

Psmith put down the glass.

'You have been told already?' he said. 'That accounts for your calm.
The shock has expended its force on you, and can do no more. You are
stunned. I am sorry, but it had to be. You will say that it is madness
for us to offer our resignations, that our grip on the work of the bank
made a prosperous career in Commerce certain for us. It may be so. But
somehow we feel that our talents lie elsewhere. To Comrade Jackson the
management of the Psmith estates seems the job on which he can get the
rapid half-Nelson. For my own part, I feel that my long suit is the
Bar. I am a poor, unready speaker, but I intend to acquire a knowledge
of the Law which shall outweigh this defect. Before leaving you, I
should like to say--I may speak for you as well as myself, Comrade
Jackson--?'

Mike uttered his first contribution to the conversation--a gurgle--and
relapsed into silence again.

'I should like to say,' continued Psmith, 'how much Comrade Jackson and
I have enjoyed our stay in the bank. The insight it has given us into
your masterly handling of the intricate mechanism of the office has
been a treat we would not have missed. But our place is elsewhere.'

He rose. Mike followed his example with alacrity. It occurred to Mr
Bickersdyke, as they turned to go, that he had not yet been able to get
in a word about their dismissal. They were drifting away with all the
honours of war.

'Come back,' he cried.

Psmith paused and shook his head sadly.

'This is unmanly, Comrade Bickersdyke,' he said. 'I had not expected
this. That you should be dazed by the shock was natural. But that you
should beg us to reconsider our resolve and return to the bank is
unworthy of you. Be a man. Bite the bullet. The first keen pang will
pass. Time will soften the feeling of bereavement. You must be brave.
Come, Comrade Jackson.'

Mike responded to the call without hesitation.

'We will now,' said Psmith, leading the way to the door, 'push back to
the flat. My father will be round there soon.' He looked over his
shoulder. Mr Bickersdyke appeared to be wrapped in thought.

'A painful business,' sighed Psmith. 'The man seems quite broken up. It
had to be, however. The bank was no place for us. An excellent career
in many respects, but unsuitable for you and me. It is hard on Comrade
Bickersdyke, especially as he took such trouble to get me into it, but
I think we may say that we are well out of the place.'

Mike's mind roamed into the future. Cambridge first, and then an
open-air life of the sort he had always dreamed of. The Problem of
Life seemed to him to be solved. He looked on down the years, and he
could see no troubles there of any kind whatsoever. Reason suggested
that there were probably one or two knocking about somewhere, but this
was no time to think of them. He examined the future, and found it good.

'I should jolly well think,' he said simply, 'that we might.'