"We've had our ups and downs like most folks, sir, and sometimes
it looked like they was mostly downs; but we got along, and last
fall I bought in the ranch down there in the Hollow. The boy was
just eighteen and we thought then that he'd be makin' his home
there some day. I don't know how that'll be now, but there was
another reason too why we wanted the place, as you'll see when I
get to it.

"There was five other boys, as I told you last night. The oldest
two would have been men now. The girl"--his voice broke--"the girl
she come third; she was twenty when we buried her over there. That
was fifteen year ago come the middle of next month.

"Everybody 'lowed she was a mighty pretty baby, and, bein' the
only girl, I reckon we made more of her than we did of the boys.
She growed up into a mighty fine young woman too; strong, and full
of fire and go, like Sammy Lane. Seems to wife and me when Sammy's
'round that it's our own girl come back and we've always hoped
that she and Grant would take the ranch down yonder; but I reckon
that's all over, now that Ollie Stewart has come into such a fine
thing in the city. Anyway, it ain't got nothing to do with this
that I'm a tellin' you.

"She didn't seem to care nothin' at all for none of the neighbor
boys like most girls do; she'd go with them and have a good time
alright, but that was all. 'Peared like she'd rather be with her
brothers or her mother or me.

"Well, one day, when we was out on the range a ridin' for stock--
she'd often go with me that way--we met a stranger over there at
the deer lick in the big low gap, coming along the Old Trail. He
was as fine a lookin' man as you ever see, sir; big and grand
like, with lightish hair, kind, of wavy, and a big mustache like
his hair, and fine white teeth showing when he smiled. He was sure
good lookin', damn him! and with his fine store clothes and a
smooth easy way of talkin' and actin' he had, 'tain't no wonder
she took up with him. We all did. I used to think God never made a
finer body for a man. I know now that Hell don't hold a meaner
heart than the one in that same fine body. And that's somethin'
that bothers me a heap, Mr. Howitt.

"As I say, our girl was built like Sammy Lane, and so far as looks
go she was his dead match. I used to wonder when I'd look at them
together if there ever was such another fine lookin' pair. I ain't
a goin' to tell you his name; there ain't no call to, as I can
see. There might be some decent man named the same. But he was one
of these here artist fellows and had come into the hills to paint,
he said."

A smothered exclamation burst from the listener.

Mr. Matthews, not noticing, continued: "He sure did make a lot of
pictures and they seemed mighty nice to us, 'though of course we
didn't know nothin' about such things. There was one big one he
made of Maggie that was as natural as life. He was always drawin'
of her in one way or another, and had a lot of little pictures
that didn't amount to much, and that he didn't never finish. But
this big one he worked at off and on all summer. It was sure fine,
with her a standin' by the ranch spring, holdin' out a cup of
water, and smilin' like she was offerin' you a drink."

It was well that the night had fallen. At Old Matt's words the
stranger shrank back in his chair, his hand raised as if to ward
off a deadly blow. He made a sound in his throat as if he would
cry out, but could not from horror or fear. But the darkness hid
his face, and the mountaineer, with mind intent upon his story,
did not heed.

"He took an old cabin at the foot of the hill near where the sheep
corral is now, and fixed it up to work in. The shack had been
built first by old man Dewey, him that the mountain's named after.
It was down there he painted the big picture of her a standin' by
the big spring. We never thought nothin' about her bein' with him
so much. Country folks is that way, Mr. Howitt, 'though we ought
to knowed better; we sure ought to knowed better." The old giant
paused and for some time sat with his head bowed, his forgotten
pipe on the floor.

"Well," he began again; "he stopped with us all that summer, and
then one day he went out as usual and didn't come back. We hunted
the hills out for signs, thinkin' maybe he met up with some
trouble. He'd sent all his pictures away the week before, Jim Lane
haulin' them to the settlement for him.

"The girl was nigh about wild and rode with me all durin' the
hunt, and once when we saw some buzzards circlin', she gave a
little cry and turned so white that I suspicioned maybe she got to
thinkin' more of him than we knew. Then one afternoon when we were
down yonder in the Hollow, she says, all of a sudden like, 'Daddy,
it ain't no use a ridin' no more. He ain't met up with no trouble.
He's left all the trouble with us.' She looked so piqued and her
eyes were so big and starin' that it come over me in a flash what
she meant. She saw in a minute that I sensed it, and just hung her
head, and we come home.

"She just kept a gettin' worse and worse, Mr. Howitt; 'peared to
fade away like, like I watched them big glade lilies do when the
hot weather comes. About the only time she would show any life at
all was when someone would go for the mail, when she'd always be
at the gate a waitin' for us.

"Then one day, a letter come. I brung it myself. She give a little
cry when I handed it to her, and run into the house, most like her
old self. I went on out to the barn to put up my horse, thinkin'
maybe it was goin' to be alright after all; but pretty soon, I
heard a scream and then a laugh. 'Fore God, sir, that laugh's a
ringin' in my ears yet. She was ravin' mad when I got to her, a
laughin', and a screechin', and tryin' to hurt herself, all the
while callin' for him to come.

"I read the letter afterwards. It told over and over how he loved
her and how no woman could ever be to him what she was; said they
was made for each other, and all that; and then it went on to say
how he couldn't never see her again; and told about what a grand
old family his was, and how his father was so proud and expected
such great things from him, that he didn't dare tell, them bein'
the last of this here old family, and her bein' a backwoods girl,
without any schoolin' or nothin'."

"My God! O, my God!" faltered the stranger's voice in the
darkness.

Old Matt talked on in a hard easy tone. "Course it was all wrote
out nice and smooth like he talked, but that's the sense of it. He
finished it by sayin' that he would be on his way to the old
country when the letter reached her, and that it wouldn't be no
use to try to find him.

"The girl quieted down after a spell, but her mind never come
back. She wasn't just to say plumb crazy, but she seemed kind o'
dazed and lost like, and wouldn't take no notice of nobody. Acted
all the time like she was expectin' him to come. And she'd stand
out there by the gate for hours at a time, watchin' the Old Trail
and talkin' low to herself.

"Pete is her boy, Mr. Howitt, and as you've seen he ain't just
right. Seems like he was marked some way in his mind like you've
seen other folks marked in their bodies. We've done our best by
the boy, sir, but I don't guess he'll ever be any better. Once for
a spell we tried keepin' him to home, but he got right sick and
would o' died sure, if we hadn't let him go; it was pitiful to see
him. Everybody 'lows there won't nothin' in the woods hurt him
nohow; so we let him come and go, as he likes; and he just stops
with the neighbors wherever he happens in. Folks are all as good
to him as they can be, 'cause everybody knows how it is. You see,
sir, people here don't think nothin' of a wood's colt, nohow, but
we was raised different. As wife says, we've most forgot civilized
ways, but I guess there's some things a man that's been raised
right can't never forget.

"She died when Pete was born, and the last thing she said was,
'He'll come, Daddy, he'll sure come.' Pete says the wind singin'
in that big pine over her grave is her a callin' for him yet. It's
mighty queer how the boy got that notion, but you see that's the
way it is with him.

"And that ain't all, sir." The big man moved his chair nearer the
other, and lowered his voice to a hoarse whisper; "Folks say she's
come back. There's them that swears they've seen her 'round the
old cabin where they used to meet when he painted her picture, the
big one, you know. Just before I bought the ranch, it was first;
and that's why we can't get no one to stay with the sheep.

"I don't know, Mr. Howitt; I don't know. I've thought a heap about
it, I ain't never seen it myself, and it 'pears to me that if she
COULD come back at all, she'd sure come to her old Daddy. Then
again I figure it that bein' took the way she was, part of her
dead, so to speak, from the time she got that letter, and her mind
so set on his comin' back, that maybe somehow--you see--that maybe
she is sort a waitin' for him there. Many's the time I have prayed
all night that God would let me meet him again just once, or that
proud father of his'n, just once, sir; I'd glad go to Hell if I
could only meet them first. If she is waitin' for him down there,
he'll come; he'll sure come. Hell couldn't hold him against such
as that, and when he comes--"

Unconsciously, as he spoke the last sentences, the giant's voice
took a tone of terrible meaning, and he slowly rose from his seat.
When he uttered the last word he was standing erect, his muscles
tense, his powerful frame shaken with passion.

There was an inarticulate cry of horror, as the mountaineer's
guest started to his feet. A moment he stood, then sank back into
his chair, a cowering, shivering heap.

Long into the night, the stranger walked the floor of his little
room under the roof, his face drawn and white, whispering half
aloud things that would have startled his unsuspecting host. "MY
boy--MY boy--MINE! To do such a thing as that! Howard--Howard. O
Christ! that I should live to be glad that you are dead! And that
picture! His masterpiece, the picture that made his fame, the
picture he would never part with, and that we could never find! I
see it all now! Just God, what a thing to carry on one's soul!"

Once he paused to stand at the window, looking down upon the
valley. The moon had climbed high above the mountain, but beneath
the flood of silver light the shadows lay dark and deep in Mutton
Hollow. Then as he stood there, from out the shadowy gloom, came
the wild, weird song they had heard the evening before. The man at
the window groaned. The song sank to a low, moaning wail, and he
seemed to hear again the wind in the pine above the grave of the
murdered girl. She was calling, calling--would he come back? Back
from the grave, could he come? The words of the giant mountaineer
seemed burned into the father's brain; Hell couldn't hold him
against such as that.

Then the man with the proud face, the face of a scholar and poet,
drew back from the window, shaking with a fear he could not
control. He crept into a corner and crouched upon the floor. With
wide eyes, he stared into the dark. He prayed.

And this is how it came about that the stranger, who followed the
Old Trail along the higher sunlit ground, followed, also, the
other trail down into the valley where the gloomy shadows are;
there to live at the ranch near the haunted cabin--the shepherd of
Mutton Hollow.


CHAPTER VII.

WHAT IS LOVE?


Sammy Lane rode very slowly on her way home from the Matthews
place that morning after the stranger had arrived. She started out
at her usual reckless gait, but that was because she knew that
Young Matt was watching her.

Once in the timber, the brown pony was pulled to a walk, and by
the time they came out into the open again, the little horse,
unrebuked by his mistress, was snatching mouthfuls of grass as he
strolled along the trail. Sammy was thinking; thinking very
seriously. Aunt Mollie's parting question had stirred the girl
deeply.

Sammy had seen few people who did not belong to the backwoods. The
strangers she had met were hunters or cattlemen, and these had all
been, in dress and manner, not unlike the natives themselves. This
man, who had come so unexpectedly out of the mists the night
before, was unlike anyone the young woman had ever known. Like Jed
Holland, she felt somehow as if he were a superior being. The
Matthews family were different in many ways from those born and
raised in the hills. And Sammy's father, too, was different. But
this stranger--it was quite as though he belonged to another
world.

Coming to the big, low gap, the girl looked far away to the blue
line of hills, miles, and miles away. The stranger had come from
over these, she thought; and then she fell to wondering what that
world beyond the farthest cloud-like ridge was like.

Of all the people Sammy had ever known, young Stewart was the only
one who had seen even the edge of that world to tell her about it.
Her father and her friends, the Matthews's, never talked of the
old days. She had known Ollie from a child. With Young Matt they
had gone to and from the log school house along the same road.
Once, before Mr. Stewart's death, the boy had gone with his father
for a day's visit to the city, and ever after had been a hero to
his backwoods schoolmates. It was this distinction, really, that
first won Sammy's admiration, and made them sweethearts before the
girl's skirts had touched the tops of her shoes. Before the woman
in her was fairly awake she had promised to be his wife; and they
were going away now to live in that enchanted land.

Spying an extra choice bunch of grass a few steps to one side of
the path, Brownie turned suddenly toward the valley; and the
girl's eyes left the distant ridge for the little cabin and the
sheep corral in Mutton Hollow. Sammy always spoke of that cabin as
"Young Matt's house." And, all unbidden now, the thought came, who
would live with the big fellow down there in the valley when she
had gone far away to make her home with Ollie and his people in
the city?

An impatient tug at the reins informed Brownie that his mistress
was aware of his existence, and, for a time, the pony was obliged
to pass many a luscious bunch of grass. But soon the reins fell
slack again. The little horse moved slowly, and still more slowly,
until, by the relaxed figure of his rider, he knew it was safe to
again browse on the grass along the path.

So, wondering, dreaming, Sammy Lane rode down the trail that
morning--the trail that is nobody knows how old. And on the hill
back of the Matthews house a team was standing idle in the middle
of the field.

At the big rock on the mountain side, where the trail seems to
pause a moment before starting down to the valley, the girl
slipped from her saddle, and, leaving Brownie to wander at will,
climbed to her favorite seat. Half reclining in the warm sunshine,
she watched the sheep feeding near, and laughed aloud as she saw
the lambs with wagging tails, greedily suckling at their mother's
sides; near by in a black-haw bush a mother bird sat on her nest;
a gray mare, with a week old colt following on unsteady legs, came
over the ridge; and not far away; a mother sow with ten squealing
pigs came out of the timber. Keeping very still the young woman
watched until they disappeared around the mountain. Then, lifting
her arms above her head, she stretched her lithe form out upon the
warm rocky couch with the freedom and grace of a wild thing of the
woods.

Sammy Lane knew nothing of the laws and customs of the, so-called,
best society. Her splendid young womanhood was not the product of
those social traditions and rules that kill the instinct of her
kind before it is fairly born. She was as free and as physically
perfect as any of the free creatures that lived in the hills. And,
keenly alive to the life that throbbed and surged about her, her
woman's heart and soul responded to the spirit of the season. The
droning of the bees in the blossoms that grew in a cranny of the
rock; the tinkle, tinkle of the sheep bells, as the flock moved
slowly in their feeding; and the soft breathing of Mother Earth
was in her ears; while the gentle breeze that stirred her hair
came heavy with the smell of growing things. Lying so, she looked
far up into the blue sky where a buzzard floated on lazy wings. If
she were up there she perhaps could see that world beyond the
hills. Then suddenly a voice came to her, Aunt Mollie's voice,
"How do you reckon you'll like bein' a fine lady, Sammy, and a
livin' in the city with the big folks?"

The girl turned on her side and rising on one elbow looked again
at Mutton Hollow with its little cabin half hidden in the timber.
And, as she looked, slowly her rich red life colored cheek, and
neck, and brow. With a gesture of impatience, Sammy turned away to
her own home on the southern slope of the mountain, just in time
to see a young woman ride into the clearing and dismount before
the cabin door. It was her friend, Mandy Ford. The girl on the
rock whistled to her pony, and, mounting, made her way down the
hill.

All that day the strange guest at the Matthews place was the one
topic of conversation between the two girls.

"Shucks," said Mandy, when Sammy had finished a very minute
description of Mr. Howitt; "he's jest some revenue, like's not."

Sammy tossed her head; "Revenue! you ought to see him! Revenues
don't come in no such clothes as them, and they don't talk like
him, neither."

"Can't tell 'bout revenues," retorted the other. "Don't you mind
how that'n fooled everybody over on th' bend last year? He was
jest as common as common, and folks all 'lowed he was just one of
'em."

"But this one ain't like anybody that we ever met up with, and
that's jest it," returned Sammy.

Mandy shook her head; "You say he ain't huntin'; he sure ain't
buyin' cattle this time o' year; and he ain't a wantin' t' locate
a comin' in on foot; what else can he be but a revenue?"

To which Sammy replied with an unanswerable argument; "Look a
here, Mandy Ford; you jest tell me, would a low down revenue ask a
blessin' like Parson Bigelow does?"

At this Mandy gave up the case, saying in despair, "Well, what is
he a doin' here then? 'Tain't likely he's done come into th' woods
fer nothin'."

"He told Old Matt that he was sick and tired of it all," answered
the other.

"Did he look like he was ailin'?"

Sammy replied slowly, "I don't reckon it's that kind of sickness
he meant; and when you look right close into his eyes, he does
'pear kind o' used up like."

In connection with this discussion, it was easy to speak of Miss
Lane's fairy prospects, for, was not the stranger from the city?
and was not Sammy going to live in that land of wonders? The two
girls were preparing for the night, when Sammy, who was seated on
the edge of the bed, paused, with one shoe off, to ask
thoughtfully, "Mandy, what is love, anyhow?"

Mandy looked surprised. "I reckon you ought to know," she said
with a laugh; "Ollie's been a hangin' 'round you ever since I can
remember."

Sammy was struggling with a knot in the other shoe lace; "Yes,"
she admitted slowly; "I reckon I had ought to know; but what do
you say it is, Mandy?"

"Why, hit's--hit's--jest a caring fer somebody more'n fer ary one
else in th' whole world."

"Is that all?" The knot was still stubborn.

"No, hit ain't all. Hit's a goin' t' live with somebody an' a
lettin' him take care o' you, 'stead o' your folks." Sammy was
still struggling with the knot. "An' hit's a cookin' an' a
scrubbin' an' a mendin' fer him, an'--an'--sometimes hit's a
splittin' wood, an' a doin' chores, too; an' I reckon that's all."

Just here the knot came undone, and the shoe dropped to the floor
with a thud. Sammy sat upright. "No, it ain't, Mandy; it's a heap
more'n that; it's a nursin' babies, and a takin' care of 'em 'till
they're growed up, and then when they're big enough to take care
o' themselves, and you're old and in the way, like Grandma Bowles,
it's a lookin' back over it all, and bein' glad you done married
the man you did. It's a heap more'n livin' with a man, Mandy; it's
a doin' all that, without ever once wishin' he was somebody else."

This was too much for Mandy; she blushed and giggled, then
remarked, as she gazed admiringly at her friend, "You'll look
mighty fine, Sammy, when you get fixed up with all them pretties
you'll have when you an' Ollie git married. I wish my hair was
bright an' shiny like yourn. How do you reckon you'll like bein' a
fine lady anyhow?"

Here it was again. Sammy turned upon her helpless friend, with,
"How do I know if I would like it or not? What is bein' a fine
lady, anyhow?"

"Why, bein' a fine lady is--is livin' in a big house with carpets
on th' floor, an' lookin' glasses, an' not havin' no work t' do,
an' wearin' pretty clothes, with lots of rings an' things, an'--
an'," she paused; then finished in triumph, "an' a ridin' in a
carriage."

That wide questioning look was in Sammy's eyes as she returned,
"It's a heap more'n that, Mandy. I don't jest sense what it is,
but I know 'tain't all them things that makes a sure 'nough lady.
'Tain't the clothes he wears that makes Mr. Howitt different from
the folks we know. He don't wear no rings, and he walks. He's jest
different 'cause he's different; and would be, no matter what he
had on or where he was."

This, too, was beyond Mandy. Sammy continued, as she finished her
preparations for retiring; "This here house is plenty big enough
for me, least wise it would be if it had one more room like the
cabin in Mutton Hollow; carpets would be mighty dirty and unhandy
to clean when the men folks come trampin' in with their muddy
boots; I wouldn't want to wear no dresses so fine I couldn't knock
'round in the brush with them; and it would be awful to have
nothin' to do; as for a carriage, I wouldn't swap Brownie for a
whole city full of carriages." She slipped into bed and stretched
out luxuriously. "Do you reckon I could be a fine lady, and be as
I am now, a livin' here in the hills?"

The next day Mandy went back to her home on Jake Creek. And in the
evening Sammy's father, with Wash Gibbs, returned, both men and
horses showing the effects of a long, hard ride.


CHAPTER VIII.

"WHY AIN'T WE GOT NO FOLKS."


Preachin' Bill says "There's a heap o' difference in most men, but
Jim Lane now he's more different than ary man you ever seed. Ain't
no better neighbor'n Jim anywhere. Ride out o' his way any time t'
do you a favor. But you bet there ain't ary man lives can ask Jim
any fool questions while Jim's a lookin' at him. Tried it onct
myself. Jim was a waitin' at th' ferry fer Wash Gibbs, an' we was
a talkin' 'long right peart 'bout crops an' th' weather an' such,
when I says, says I, like a dumb ol' fool, 'How'd you like it down
in Texas, Jim, when you was there that time?' I gonies! His jaw
shet with a click like he'd cocked a pistol, an' that look o'
hisn, like he was a seein' plumb through you, come int' his eyes,
an' he says, says he, quiet like, 'D' you reckon that rain over on
James yesterday raised th' river much?' An' 'fore I knowed it, I
was a tellin' him how that ol' red bull o' mine treed th' Perkins'
boys when they was a possum huntin'."

Many stories of the Bald Knobber days, when the law of the land
was the law of rifle and rope, were drifting about the country
side, and always, when these tales were recited, the name of Jim
Lane was whispered; while the bolder ones wondered beneath their
breath where Jim went so much with that Wash Gibbs, whose daddy
was killed by the Government.

Mr. Lane was a tall man, well set up, with something in his face
and bearing that told of good breeding; southern blood, one would
say, by the dark skin, and the eyes, hair, and drooping mustache
of black.

His companion, Wash Gibbs, was a gigantic man; taller and heavier,
even, than the elder Matthews, but more loosely put together than
Old Matt; with coarse, heavy features, and, as Grandma Bowles
said, "the look of a sheep killin' dog." Grandma, being very near
her journey's end, could tell the truth even about Wash Gibbs, but
others spoke of the giant only in whispers, save when they spoke
in admiration of his physical powers.

As the two men swung stiffly from their saddles, Sammy came
running to greet her father with a kiss of welcome; this little
exhibition of affection between parent and child was one of the
many things that marked the Lanes as different from the natives of
that region. Your true backwoodsman carefully hides every sign of
his love for either family or friends. Wash Gibbs stood looking on
with an expression upon his brutal face that had very little of
the human in it.

Releasing his daughter, Mr. Lane said, "Got anything to eat,
honey? We're powerful hungry. Wash 'lowed we'd better tie up at
the river, but I knew you'd be watching for me. The horses are
plumb beat." And Gibbs broke in with a coarse laugh, "I wouldn't
mind killin' a hoss neither, if I was t' git what you do at th'
end o' th' ride."

To this, Jim made no reply; but began loosening the saddle girths,
while Sammy only said, as she turned toward the house, "I'll have
supper ready for you directly, Daddy."

While the host was busy caring for his tired horse, the big man,
who did not remove the saddle from his mount, followed the girl
into the cabin. "Can't you even tell a feller, Howdy?" he
exclaimed, as he entered the kitchen.

"I did tell you, Howdy," replied the girl sharply, stirring up the
fire.

"'Pears like you might o' been a grain warmer about hit," growled
the other, seating himself where he could watch her. "If I'd been
Young Matt er that skinny Ollie Stewart, you'd a' been keen
enough."

Sammy turned and faced him with angry eyes; "Look a here, Wash
Gibbs, I done tol' you last Thursday when you come for Daddy that
you'd better let me alone. I don't like you, and I don't aim to
ever have anything to do with you. You done fixed yourself with me
that time at the Cove picnic. I'll tell Daddy about that if you
don't mind. I don't want to make no trouble, but you just got to
quit pestering me."

The big fellow sneered. "I 'lowed you might change your mind 'bout
that some day. Jim ain't goin' t' say nothin' t' me, an' if he
did, words don't break no bones. I'm a heap th' best man in this
neck o' th' woods, an' your Paw knows hit. You know it, too."

Under his look, the blood rushed to the girl's face in a burning
blush. In spite of her anger she dropped her eyes, and, without
attempting a reply, turned to her work.

A moment later, Mr. Lane entered the room; a single glance at his
daughter's face, a quick look at Wash Gibbs, as the bully sat
following with wolfish eyes every movement of the girl, and Jim
stepped quietly in front of his guest. At the same moment, Sammy
left the house for a bucket of water, and Wash turned toward his
host with a start to find the dark faced man gazing at him with a
look that few men could face with composure. Without a word, Jim's
right hand crept stealthily inside his hickory shirt, where a
button was missing.

For a moment Gibbs tried to return the look. He failed. Something
he read in the dark face before him--some meaning light in those
black eyes--made him tremble and he felt, rather than saw, Jim's
hand resting quietly now inside the hickory shirt near his left
arm pit. The big man's face went white beneath the tan, his eyes
wavered and shifted, he hung his head and shuffled his feet
uneasily, like an overgrown school-boy brought sharply to task by
the master.

Then Jim, his hand still inside his shirt, drawled, softly, but
with a queer metallic ring in his voice, "Do you reckon it's a
goin' t' storm again?"

At the commonplace question, the bully drew a long breath and
looked around. "We might have a spell o' weather," he muttered;
"but I don't guess it'll be t'night."

Then Sammy returned and they had supper.

Next to his daughter, Jim Lane loved his violin, and with good
reason, for the instrument had once belonged to his great-
grandfather, who, tradition says, was a musician of no mean
ability.

Preachin' Bill "'lowed there was a heap o' difference between a
playin' a violin an' jest fiddlin'. You wouldn't know some fellers
was a makin' music, if you didn't see 'em a pattin' their foot;
but hit ain't that a way with Jim Lane. He sure do make music,
real music." As no one ever questioned Bill's judgment, it is safe
to conclude that Mr. Lane inherited something of his great-
grandfather's ability; along with his treasured instrument.

When supper was over, and Wash Gibbs had gone on his way; Jim took
the violin from its peg above the fireplace, and, tucking it
lovingly under his chin, gave himself up to his favorite pastime,
while Sammy moved busily about the cabin, putting things right for
the night.

When her evening tasks were finished, the girl came and stood
before her father. At once the music ceased and the violin was
laid carefully aside. Sammy seated herself on her father's knee.

"Law', child, but you're sure growin' up," said Jim, with a mock
groan at her weight.

"Yes, Daddy, I reckon I'm about growed; I'll be nineteen come
Christmas."

"O shucks!" ejaculated the man. "It wasn't more'n last week that
you was washin' doll clothes, down by the spring."

The young woman laughed. "I didn't wash no doll clothes last
week," she said. Then her voice changed, and that wide,
questioning look, the look that made one think so of her father,
came into her eyes. "There's something I want to ask you, Daddy
Jim. You--you know--Ollie's goin' away, an'--an'--an' I was
thinkin' about it all day yesterday, an', Daddy, why ain't we got
no folks?"

Mr. Lane stirred uneasily. Sammy continued, "There's the
Matthews's, they've got kin back in Illinois; Mandy Ford's got
uncles and aunts over on Lang Creek; Jed Holland's got a grandad
and mam, and even Preachin' Bill talks about a pack o' kin folks
over in Arkansaw. Why ain't we got no folks, Daddy?"

The man gazed long and thoughtfully at the fresh young face of his
child; and the black eyes looked into the brown eyes keenly, as he
answered her question with another question, "Do you reckon you
love him right smart, honey? Are you sure, dead sure you ain't
thinkin' of what he's got 'stead of what he is? I know it'll be
mighty nice for you to be one of the fine folks and they're big
reasons why you ought, but it's goin' to take a mighty good man to
match you--a mighty good man. And it's the man you've got to live
with, not his money."

"Ollie's good, Daddy," she returned in a low voice, her eyes fixed
upon the floor.

"I know, I know," replied Jim. "He wouldn't do nobody no harm;
he's good enough that way, and I ain't a faultin' him. But you
ought to have a MAN, a sure enough good man."

"But tell me, Daddy, why ain't we got no folks?"

The faintest glimmer of a smile came into the dark face; "You're
sure growed up, girl; you're sure growed up, girl; you sure are.
An' I reckon you might as well know." Then he told her.


CHAPTER IX.

SAMMY LANE'S FOLKS.


It began on a big southern plantation, where there were several
brothers and sisters, with a gentleman father of no little pride,
and a lady mother of equal pride and great beauty.

With much care for detail, Jim drew a picture of the big mansion
with its wide lawns, flower gardens and tree bordered walks; with
its wealth of culture, its servants, and distinguished guests;
for, said he, "When you get to be a fine lady, you ought to know
that you got as good blood as the best of the thorough-breds." And
Sammy, interrupting his speech with a kiss, bade him go on with
his story.

Then he told how the one black sheep of that proud southern flock
had been cast forth from the beautiful home while still hardly
grown; and how, with his horse, gun and violin, the wanderer had
come into the heart of the Ozark wilderness, when the print of
moccasin feet was still warm on the Old Trail. Jim sketched
broadly here, and for some reason did not fully explain the cause
of his banishment; neither did he comment in any way upon its
justice or injustice.

Time passed, and a strong, clear-eyed, clean-limbed, deep-bosomed
mountain lass, with all the mastering passion of her kind, mated
the free, half wild, young hunter; and they settled in the cabin
by the spring on the southern slope of Dewey. Then the little one
came, and in her veins there was mingled the blue blood of the
proud southerners and the warm red life of her wilderness mother.

Again Jim's story grew rich in detail. Holding his daughter at
arm's length, and looking at her through half-closed eyes, he
said, "You're like her, honey; you're mighty like her; same eyes,
same hair, same mouth, same build, same way of movin', strong, but
smooth and free like. She could run clean to the top of Dewey, or
sit a horse all day. Do you ever get tired, girl?"

Sammy laughed, and shook her head; "I've run from here to the
signal tree, lots of times, Daddy."

"You're like the old folks, too," mused Jim; "like them in what
you think and say."

"Tell me more," said the girl. "Seems like I remember bein' in a
big wagon, and there was a woman there too; was she my mother?"

Jim nodded, and unconsciously lowered his voice, as he said, "It
was in the old Bald Knobber time. Things happened in them days,
honey. Many's the night I've seen the top of old Dewey yonder
black with men. It was when things was broke up, that--that your
mother and me thought we could do better in Texas; so we went,"
Jim was again sketching broadly.

"Your mother left us there, girl. Seemed like she couldn't stand
it, bein' away from the hills or somethin', and she just give up.
I never did rightly know how it was. We buried her out there, way
out on the big plains."

"I remember her a little," whispered Sammy. Jim continued; "Then
after a time you and me come back to the old place. Your mother
named you Samantha, girl, but bein' as there wasn't no boy, I
always called you Sammy. It seems right enough that way now, for
you've sure been more'n a son to me since we've been alone; and
that's one reason why I learned you to ride and shoot with the
best of them.

"There's them that says I ain't done right by you, bringing you up
without ary woman about the place; and I don't know as I have, but
somehow I couldn't never think of no woman as I ought, after
living with your mother. And then there was Aunt Mollie to learn
you how to cook and do things about the house. I counted a good
bit, too, on the old stock, and it sure showed up right. You're
like the old folks, girl, in the way you think, but you're like
your mother in the way you look."

Sammy's arms went around her father's neck, "You're a good man,
Daddy Jim; the best Daddy a girl ever had; and if I ain't all bad,
it's on account of you." There was a queer look on the man's dark
face. He had sketched some parts of his tale with a broad hand,
indeed.

The girl raised her head again; "But, Daddy, I wish you'd do
something for me. I--I don't like Wash Gibbs to be a comin' here.
I wish you'd quit ridin' with him, Daddy. I'm--I'm afeared of him;
he looks at me so. He's a sure bad one--I know he is, Daddy."

Jim laughed and again there was that odd metallic note in his
voice; "I've knowed him a long time, honey. Me and his daddy was--
was together when he died; and you used to sit on Wash's knee when
you was a little tad. Not that he's so mighty much older than you,
but he was a man's size at fifteen. You don't understand, girl,
but I've got to go with him sometimes. But don't you fret; Wash
Gibbs ain't goin' to hurt me, and he won't come here more'n I can
help, either." Then he changed the subject abruptly. "Tell me what
you've been doin' while I was away."

Sammy told of' her visit to their friends at the Matthews place,
and of the stranger who had come into the neighborhood. As the
girl talked, her father questioned her carefully, and several
times the metallic note crept into his soft, drawling speech,
while into his eyes came that peculiar, searching look, as if he
would draw from his daughter even more than she knew of the
incident. Once he rose, and, going to the door, stood looking out
into the night.

Sammy finished with her answer to Mandy Ford's opinion of the
stranger; "You don't reckon a revenue would ask a blessin', do
you, Daddy? Seems like he just naturally wouldn't dast; God would
make the victuals stick in his throat and choke him sure."

Jim laughed, as he replied, "I don't know, girl; I never heard of
a revenue's doin' such. But a feller can't tell."

When Sammy left him to retire for the night, her father picked up
the violin again, and placed it beneath his chin as if to play;
but he did not touch the strings, and soon hung the instrument in
its place above the mantel. Then, going to the doorway, he lighted
his pipe, and, for a full hour, sat, looking up the Old Trail
toward the Matthews place, his right hand thrust into the bosom of
his hickory shirt, where the button was missing.


CHAPTER X.

A FEAT OF STRENGTH AND A CHALLENGE.


What the club is to the city man, and the general store or
postoffice to the citizens of the country village, the mill is to
the native of the backwoods.

Made to saw the little rough lumber he needs in his primitive
building, or to grind his corn into the rough meal, that is his
staff of life, the mill does more for the settler than this; it
brings together the scattered population, it is the news center,
the heart of the social life, and the hub of the industrial wheel.

On grinding day, the Ozark mountaineer goes to mill on horse-back,
his grist in a sack behind the saddle, or, indeed, taking place of
the saddle itself. The rule is, first come, first served. So,
while waiting his turn, or waiting for a neighbor who will ride in
the same direction, the woodsman has time to contribute his share
to the gossip of the country side, or to take part in the
discussions that are of more or less vital interest. When the talk
runs slow, there are games; pitching horse shoes, borrowed from
the blacksmith shop--there is always a blacksmith shop near by;
running or jumping contests, or wrestling or shooting matches.

Fall Creek Mill, owned and operated by Mr. Matthews and his son,
was located on Fall Creek in a deep, narrow valley, about a mile
from their home.

A little old threshing engine, one of the very first to take the
place of the horse power, and itself in turn already pushed to the
wall by improved competitors, rolled the saw or the burr. This
engine, which had been rescued by Mr. Matthews from the scrap-pile
of a Springfield machine shop, was accepted as evidence beyond
question of the superior intelligence and genius of the Matthews
family. In fact, Fall Creek Mill gave the whole Mutton Hollow
neighborhood such a tone of up-to-date enterprise, that folks from
the Bend, or the mouth of the James, looked upon the Mutton Hollow
people with no little envy and awe, not to say even jealousy.

The settlers came to the Matthews mill from far up the creek,
crossing and recrossing the little stream; from Iron Spring and
from Gardner, beyond Sand Ridge, following faint, twisting bridle
paths through the forest; from the other side of Dewey Bald, along
the Old Trail; from the Cove and from the Postoffice at the Forks,
down the wagon road, through the pinery; and from Wolf Ridge and
the head of Indian Creek beyond, climbing the rough mountains.
Even from the river bottoms they came, yellow and shaking with
ague, to swap tobacco and yarns, and to watch with never failing
interest the crazy old engine, as Young Matt patted, and coaxed,
and flattered her into doing his will.

They began coming early that grinding day, two weeks after Mr.
Howitt had been installed at the ranch. But the young engineer was
ready, with a good head of steam in the old patched boiler, and
the smoke was rising from the rusty stack, in a long, twisting
line, above the motionless tree tops.

It was a great day for Young Matt; great because he knew that
Sammy Lane would be coming to mill; he would see her and talk with
her; perhaps if he were quick enough, he might even lift her from
the brown pony.

It was a great day, too, because Ollie Stewart would be saying
good-by, and before to-morrow would be on his way out of the
hills. Not that it mattered whether Ollie went or not. It was
settled that Sammy was going to marry young Stewart; that was what
mattered. And Young Matt had given her up. And, as he had told his
father in the barn that day, it was alright. But still--still it
was a great day, because Ollie would be saying good-by.

It was a great day in Young Matt's life, too, because on that day
he would issue his challenge to the acknowledged champion of the
country-side, Wash Gibbs. But Young Matt did not know this until
afterwards, for it all came about in a very unexpected way.

The company had been discussing the new arrival in the
neighborhood, and speculating as to the probable length of Mr.
Howitt's stay at the ranch, and while Young Matt was in the burr-
house with his father, they had gone over yet again the familiar
incidents of the ghost story; how "Budd Wilson seen her as close
as from here t' th' shop yonder." How "Joe Gardner's mule had gone
plumb hog-wild when he tried to ride past the ol' ruins near th'
ranch." And "how Lem Wheeler, while out hunting that roan steer o'
hisn, had heard a moanin' an' a wailin' under the bluff."

Upon Young Matthews returning to his engine, the conversation had
been skilfully changed, to Ollie Stewart and his remarkable good
fortune. From Ollie and his golden prospects, it was an easy way
to Sammy Lane and her coming marriage.

Buck Thompson was just concluding a glowing tribute to the girl's
beauty of face and form when Young Matt reached for an axe lying
near the speaker. Said Buck, "Preachin' Bill 'lowed t'other day
hit didn't make no difference how much money th' ol' man left
Ollie he'd be a poor sort of a man anyhow; an' that there's a heap
better men than him right here in th' hills that Sammy could a'
had fer th' askin'."

"How 'bout that, Matt?" called a young fellow from the river.

The big man's face flushed at the general laugh which followed,
and he answered hotly, as he swung his axe, "You'd better ask Wash
Gibbs; I hear he says he's the best man in these woods."

"I reckin as how Wash can back his jedgment there," said Joe.

"Wash is a sure good man," remarked Buck, "but there's another not
so mighty far away that'll pretty nigh hold, him level." He looked
significantly to where Young Matt was making the big chips fly.

"Huh," grunted Joe. "I tell you, gentlemen, that there man, Gibbs,
is powerful; yes, sir, he sure is. Tell you what I seed him do."
Joe pulled a twist of tobacco from his hip pocket, and settled
down upon his heels, his back against a post. "Wash an' me was a
goin' to th' settlement last fall, an' jest this side th' camp
house, on Wilderness Road, we struck a threshin' crew stuck in th'
mud with their engine. Had a break down o' some kind. Somethin'
th' matter with th' hind wheel. And jest as Wash an' me drove up,
th' boss of th' outfit was a tellin' 'em t' cut a big pole for a
pry t' lift th' hind ex, so's they could block it up, an' fix th'
wheel.

"Wash he looked at 'em a minute an' then says, says he, 'Hold on,
boys; you don't need ary pole.'

"'What do you know 'bout an engine, you darned hill billy,' says
th' old man, kind o' short.

"'Don't know nothin' 'bout an engine, you prairie hopper,' says
Wash, 'but I know you don't need no pole t' lift that thing.'

"'How'd you lift it then?' says t'other.

"'Why I'd jest catch holt an' lift,' says Wash.

"The gang like t' bust themselves laughin'. 'Why you blame fool,'
says the boas; 'do you know what that engine'll weigh?"

"'Don't care a cuss WHAT she'll weigh,' says Wash. 'She ain't
PLANTED there, is she?' An' with that he climbs down from th'
wagon, an' dad burn me if he didn't take holt o' that hind ex an'
lift one whole side o' that there engine clean off th' ground.
Them fellers jest stood 'round an' looked at him t' beat th' stir.
'Well,' says Wash, still a keepin' his holt; slide a block under
her an' I'll mosey along!

"That boss didn't say a word 'till he'd got a bottle from a box on
th' wagon an' handed, hit t' Wash; then he says kind o' scared
like, 'Where in hell are you from, Mister?'

"'Oh, I'm jest a kid from over on Roark,' says Wash, handin' th'
bottle t' me. 'You ought t' see some o' th' MEN in my
neighborhood!' Then we went on."

When the speaker had finished, there was quiet for a little; then
the young man from the river drawled, "How much did you say that
there engine 'd weigh, Joe?"

There was a general laugh at this, which the admirer of Gibbs took
good naturedly; "Don't know what she'd weigh but she was 'bout the
size o' that one there," he answered.

With one accord everyone turned to inspect the mill engine.
"Pretty good lift, Joe. Let's you an' me take a pull at her,
Budd," remarked Lem Wheeler.

The two men lifted and strained at the wheel. Then another joined
them, and, amid the laughter and good natured raillery of the
crowd, the three tried in vain to lift one of the wheels; while
Mr. Matthews, seeing some unusual movement, came into the shed and
stood with his son, an amused witness of their efforts.

"Sure this engine ain't bigger'n t'other, Joe?" asked one of the
group.

"Don't believe she weighs a pound more," replied the mountaineer
with conviction. "I tell you, gentlemen, that man Gibbs is a
wonder, he sure is."

Old Matt and his son glanced quickly at each other, and the boy
shook his head with a smile. This little by-play was lost on the
men who were interested in the efforts of different ones, in
groups of three, to move the wheel. When they had at last given it
up, the young man from the river drawled, "You're right sure hit
weren't after th' boas give you that bottle that Wash lifted her,
are you Joe? Or wasn't hit on th' way home from th' settlement?"

When the laugh at this insinuation had died out, Buck said
thoughtfully, "Tell you what, boys; I'd like t' see Young Matt try
that lift."

Mr. Matthews, who was just starting back to the burr-house, paused
in the doorway. All eyes were fixed upon his son. "Try her, Matt.
Show us what you can do," called the men in chorus. But the young
man shook his head, and found something that needed his immediate
attention.

All that morning at intervals the mountaineers urged the big
fellow to attempt the feat, but he always put them off with some
evasive reply, or was too busy to gratify them.

But after dinner, while the men were pitching horse shoes in front
of the blacksmith shop, Buck Thompson approached the young
engineer alone. "Look a here, Matt," he said, "why don't you try
that lift? Durned me if I don't believe you'd fetch her."

The young giant looked around; "I know I can, Buck; I lifted her
yesterday while Dad fixed the blockin'; I always do it that way."

Buck looked at him in amazement. "Well, why in thunder don't you
show th' boys, then?" he burst forth at last.

"'Cause if I do Wash Gibbs'll hear of it sure, and I'll have to
fight him to settle which is th' best man."

"Good Lord!" ejaculated Buck, with a groan. "If you're afraid o'
Wash Gibbs, it's th' first thing I ever knowed you t' be scared
o'."

Young Matt looked his friend steadily in the eyes, as he replied;
"I ain't afraid of Wash Gibbs; I'm afraid of myself. Mr. Howitt
says, 'No man needn't be afraid of nobody but himself.' I've been
a thinkin' lately, Buck, an' I see some things that I never see
before. I figure it that if I fight Wash Gibbs or anybody else
just to see which is th' best man, I ain't no better'n he is. I
reckon I'll have to whip him some day, alright, an' I ain't a
carin' much how soon it comes; but I ain't a goin' to hurt nobody
for nothin' just because I can."

Buck made no reply to this. Such sentiment was a little too much
for his primitive notions. He went back to the men by the
blacksmith shop.

It was not long, however, until the players left their game, to
gather once more about the engine. Lem Wheeler approached Young
Matt with a serious air; "Look a here," he said; "we all want t'
see you try that lift."

"I ain't got no time for foolin'," replied the young man; "Dad's
just pushin' to get done before dark."

"Shucks!" retorted the other; "Hit won't take a minute t' try.
Jest catch hold an' show us what you can do."

"What are you all so keen about my liftin' for, anyhow?" demanded
the big fellow, suspiciously. "I ain't never set up as the strong
man of this country."

"Well, you see it's this way; Buck done bet me his mule colt agin
mine that you could lift her; an' we want you to settle th' bet!"
exclaimed Lem.

Young Matthews shot a glance at the mountaineer, who grinned
joyously. "Yep," said Buck, "that's how it is; I'm a backin' you.
Don't want you t' hurt yourself for me, but I sure do need that
colt o' Lem's; hit's a dead match for mine."

The giant looked at his friend a moment in silence, then burst
into a laugh of appreciation at Buck's hint. "Seein' as how you're
backin' me, Buck, I'll have t' get you that mule if I can."

He shut off steam, and, as the engine came to a stop, stooped,
and, with apparent ease, lifted the rear wheel a full four inches
from the ground.

Loud exclamations of admiration came from the little group of men
in the shed. Lem turned with a long face, "Them colts 'll make a
fine team, Buck;" he said.

"You bet; come over an' hep me break 'em," replied Buck, with
another grin of delight.

"Wait 'till Wash Gibbs hears 'bout this, an' he'll sure be for
breakin' Young Matt," put in another.

"Better get your fightin' clothes on, Matt; Wash'll never rest
easy until you've done showed him." These and similar remarks
revealed the general view of the situation.

While the men were discussing the matter, a thin, high-pitched
voice from the edge of the crowd, broke in, "That there's a good
lift alright, but hit ain't nothin' t' what I seed when I was t'
th' circus in th' city."

Young Matt, who had started the engine again, turned quickly.
Ollie Stewart was sitting on a horse near by, and at his side, on
the brown pony, was Miss Sammy Lane. They had evidently ridden up
just in time to witness the exhibition of the giant's strength.


CHAPTER XI.

OLLIE STEWART'S GOOD-BY.


Beside the splendidly developed young woman, Ollie Stewart
appeared but a weakling. His shoulders were too narrow and he
stooped; his limbs were thin; his hair black and straight; and his
eyes dull.

As Young Matt stepped forward, Ollie dismounted quickly, but the
big fellow was first at the brown pony's side. Sammy's eyes shone
with admiration, and, as the strong man felt their light, he was
not at all sorry that he had won the mule colt for Buck.

"No," she said, declining his offered assistance; she did not wish
to get down; they were going to the postoffice and would call for
the meal on their way home.

Young Matt lifted the sack of corn from Brownie's back and carried
it into the shed. When he returned to the group, Ollie was saying
in his thin voice, "In th' circus I seen in the city there was a
feller that lifted a man, big as Jed here, clean above his head
with one hand."

Buck turned to his big friend. His look was met by a grim smile
that just touched the corners of the lad's mouth, and there was a
gleam in the blue eyes that betrayed the spirit within. The lean
mountaineer again turned to the company, while the boy glanced at
Sammy. The girl was watching him and had caught the silent
exchange between the two friends.

"Shucks!" said Buck; "Matt could do that easy." "Try it, Matt."
"Try Jed here." "Try hit once," called the chorus.

This time the big fellow needed no urging. With Sammy looking on,
he could not resist the opportunity which Ollie himself had
presented. Without a word, but with a quick tightening of the
lips, he stepped forward and caught Jed by the belt with his right
hand; and then, before anyone could guess his purpose, he reached
out with his other hand, and grasped Ollie himself in the same
manner. There was a short step forward, a quick upward swing, and
the giant held a man in each hand at full arm's length above his
head. Amid the shouts of the crowd, still holding the men, he
walked deliberately to the blacksmith shop and back; then lowering
them easily to their feet, turned to his engine.

Ollie and Sammy rode away together, up the green arched road, and
the little company in the mill shed stood watching them. As the
finely formed young woman and her inferior escort passed from
sight, a tall mountaineer, from the other side of Compton Ridge,
remarked, "I done heard Preachin' Bill say t'other day, that
'mighty nigh all this here gee-hawin', balkin', and kickin'
'mongst th' married folks comes 'cause th' teams ain't matched up
right.' Bill he 'lowed God 'lmighty 'd fixed hit somehow so th'
birds an' varmints don't make no mistake, but left hit plumb easy
for men an' women t' make durned fools o' theirselves."

Everybody grinned in appreciation, and another spoke up;
"According t' that, I'll bet four bits if them two yonder ever do
get into double harness, there'll be pieces o' th' outfit strung
from th' parson's clean t' th' buryin' ground."

When the laughter had subsided, Buck turned to see Young Matt
standing just outside the shed, ostensibly doing something with
the belt that led to the burr, but in reality looking up the
creek.

"Law!" ejaculated Buck, under his breath; "what a team THEY'D
make!"

"Who?" said Lem, who was standing near by.

"Them mule colts," returned Buck with a grin.

"They sure will, Buck. There ain't two better in the country;
they're a dead match. I'll come over an' hep you break 'em when
they're big 'nough." And then he wondered why Buck swore with such
evident delight.

One by one the natives received their meal, and, singly, or in
groups of two or three, were swallowed up by the great forest.
Already the little valley was in the shadow of the mountain,
though the sun still shone brightly on the tree tops higher up,
when Ollie and Sammy returned from the Forks. Mr. Matthews had
climbed the hill when the last grist was ground, leaving his son
to cool down the engine and put things right about the mill.

"Come on, Matt," said Ollie, as the big fellow brought out the
meal; "It's time you was a goin' home."

The young giant hung back, saying, "You folks better go on ahead.
I'll get home alright."

"Didn't think nothin' would get you," laughed Ollie. "Come on, you
might as well go 'long with us."

The other muttered something about being in the way, and started
back into the shed.

"Hurry up," called Sammy, "we're waitin'."

After this there was nothing else for the young man to do but join
them. And the three were soon making their way up the steep
mountain road together.

For a time they talked of commonplace things, then Young Matt
opened the subject that was on all their hearts. "I reckon, Ollie,
this is the last time that you'll ever be a climbin' this old
road." As he spoke he was really thinking of the time to come when
Sammy would climb the road for the last time.

"Yes," returned Stewart; "I go to-morrow 'fore sun up."

The other continued; "It'll sure be fine for you to live in the
city and get your schoolin' and all that. Us folks here in the
woods don't know nothin'. We ain't got no chance to learn. You'll
be forgettin' us all mighty quick, I reckon, once you get to
livin' with your rich kin."

"'Deed, I won't!" returned Ollie warmly. "Sammy an' me was a
talkin' 'bout that this evenin'. We aim t' always come back t'
Mutton Holler onct a year, an' be just like other folks; don't we,
Sammy?"

The brown pony, stepping on a loose stone, stumbled toward the man
walking by his side. And the big fellow put out his hand quickly
to the little horse's neck. For an instant, the girl's hand rested
on the giant's shoulder, and her face was close to his. Then
Brownie recovered his footing, and Young Matt drew farther away.

Ollie continued; "We aim t' have you come t' th' city after a
while. I'm goin' t' get Uncle Dan t' give you a job in th' shops,
an' you can get out o' these hills an' be somebody like we'uns."

The tone was unmistakably patronizing. The big mountaineer lifted
his head proudly, and turned toward the speaker; but before he
could reply, Sammy broke in eagerly, "Law! but that would sure be
fine, wouldn't it, Matt? I'd know you'd do somethin' big if you
only had the chance. I just know you would. You're so--so kind o'
big every way," she laughed. "It's a plumb shame for you to be
buried alive in these hills."

There was nothing said after this, until, coming to the top of the
ridge, they stopped. From here Ollie and Sammy would take the Old
Trail to the girl's home. Then, with his eyes on the vast sweep of
forest-clad hills and valleys, over which the blue haze was fast
changing to purple in the level rays of the sun, Young Matt spoke.

"I don't guess you'd better figure on that. Some folks are made to
live in the city, and some ain't. I reckon I was built to live in
these hills. I don't somehow feel like I could get along without
them; and besides, I'd always be knockin' against somethin'
there." He laughed grimly, and stretched out his huge arms. "I've
got to have room. Then there's the folks yonder." He turned his
face toward the log house, just showing through the trees. "You
know how it is, me bein' the only one left, and Dad gettin' old.
No, I don't guess you need to count on me bein' more than I am."

Then suddenly he wheeled about and looked from one face to the
other; and there was a faint hint of defiance in his voice, as he
finished; "I got an idea, too, that the backwoods needs men same
as the cities. I don't see how there ever could BE a city even, if
it wasn't for the men what cleared the brush. Somebody's got to
lick Wash Gibbs some day, or there just naturally won't be no
decent livin' in the neighborhood ever."

He held up his big hand to the man on the horse; "Good-by, and
good luck to you, Ollie." The horses turned down the Old Trail and
with their riders, passed from sight.

That night Sammy Lane said farewell to her lover, and, with many
promises for the future, Ollie rode away to his cabin home, to
leave the next morning for that world that lies so far--so far
away from the world of Young Matt and his friends, the world that
is so easy to get into after all, and so impossible to get out of
ever.


CHAPTER XII.

THE SHEPHERD AND HIS FLOCK.


All that spring and summer things went smoothly in the Mutton
Hollow neighborhood. The corn was ready to gather, and nothing had
happened at the ranch since Mr. Howitt took charge, while the man,
who had appeared so strangely in their midst, had made a large
place for himself in the hearts of the simple mountaineers.

At first they were disposed to regard him with some distrust, as
one apart; he was so unlike themselves. But when he had changed
his dress for the rough garb of the hillsman, and, meeting them
kindly upon their own ground, had entered so readily into their
life, the people by common consent dropped the distinguishing
title "Mister" for the more familiar one of the backwoods, "Dad."
Not that they lacked in respect or courtesy; it was only their
way. And the quiet shepherd accepted the title with a pleased
smile, seeming to find in the change an honor to be received not
lightly. But while showing such interest in all that made up their
world, the man never opened the door for anyone to enter his past.
They knew no more of his history than the hints he had given Mr.
Matthews the night he came out of the mists.

At the occasional religious meetings in the school house at the
Forks, Mr. Howitt was always present, an attentive listener to the
sermons of the backwoods preacher. And then, seeing his interest,
they asked him to talk to them one day when Parson Bigelow failed
to make his appointment. "He don't holler so much as a regular
parson," said Uncle Josh Hensley, "but he sure talks so we'uns can
understand." From that time they always called upon him at their
public gatherings.

So the scholar from the world beyond the ridges slipped quietly
into the life of the mountain folk, and took firm root in their
affections. And in his face, so "Preachin' Bill" said, was the
look of one who had "done fought his fight to a finish, an' war
too dead beat t' even be glad it war all over."

Between the giant Mr. Matthews and his shepherd, the friendship,
begun that night, grew always stronger. In spite of the difference
in education and training, they found much in common. Some bond of
fellowship, unknown to the mountaineer, at least, drew them close,
and the two men spent many evenings upon the front porch of the
log house in quiet talk, while the shadows crept over the valley
below; and the light went from the sky back of the clump of pines.

From the first Young Matt was strongly drawn to the stranger, who
was to have such influence over his life, and Pete--Pete said that
"God lived with Dad Howitt in Mutton Hollow."

Pete somehow knew a great deal about God these days. A strange
comradeship had come to be between the thoughtful gentleman, who
cared for the sheep, and the ignorant, sorely afflicted, and
nameless backwoods boy. The two were always together, out on the
hillside and in the little glens and valleys, during the day with
the sheep, or at the ranch in the Hollow, when the flock was
safely folded and the night slipped quietly over the timbered
ridges. Mr. Howitt had fixed a bunk in his cabin for the boy, so
that he could come and go at will. Often the shepherd awoke in the
morning to find that some time during the night his strange friend
had come in from his roving. Again, after seeing the boy soundly
sleeping, the shepherd would arise in the morning to find the bunk
empty.

Sammy Lane, too, had fallen under the charm of the man with the
white hair and poet's face.

Sammy was not so often at the Matthews place after Ollie had gone
to the city. The girl could not have told why. She had a vague
feeling that it was better to stay away. But this feeling did not
prevent her climbing the Old Trail to the Lookout on the shoulder
of Dewey, and she spent hours at the big rock, looking over the
valley to where the smoke from Aunt Mollie's kitchen curled above
the trees. And sometimes, against the sky, she could see a man and
a team moving slowly to and fro in the field back of the house.
When this happened, Sammy always turned quickly away to where the
far off line of hills lay like a long, low cloud against the sky.

Every week the girl rode her brown pony to the Postoffice at the
Forks; and when she had a letter, things were different. She
always stopped then at the Matthews home.

One day when this happened, Dad and Pete were on the ridge above
the Old Trail, just where the north slope of Dewey shades into the
rim of the Hollow. The elder man was seated on the ground in the
shade of an oak, with his back against the trunk of the tree,
while the boy lay full length on the soft grass, looking up into
the green depths of foliage where a tiny brown bird flitted from
bough to bough. In his quaint way, Pete was carrying on a
conversation with his little friend in the tree top, translating
freely the while for his less gifted, but deeply interested,
companion on the ground below, when Brave, the shepherd dog, lying
near, interrupted the talk by a short bark. Looking up, they saw
Young Matt riding along the summit of the ridge.

The young man paused when he heard the dog, and caught sight of
the two under the tree; then he came to them, and seated himself
on the grass at Pete's side. He spoke no word of greeting, and the
look on his face was not good to see.

Pete's eyes went wide with fear at the manner of his big friend,
and he drew back as if to run, but when Young Matt, throwing
himself over on the grass, had hidden his face, a half sad, half
knowing look came into the lad's delicate features; reaching forth
a hand, as slim as a girl's, he stroked the shaggy, red brown
head, as he murmured softly, "Poor Matt. Poor Matt. Does it hurt?
Is Matt hurt? It'll be better by-and-by."

The great form on the grass stirred impatiently. The shepherd
spoke no word. Pete continued, stroking the big head, and talking
in low, soothing tones, as one would hush a child, "Pete don't
know what's a hurtin' Young Matt, but it'll be alright, some day.
It'll sure grow over after awhile. Ain't nothing won't grow over
after awhile; 'cause God he says so."

Still the older man was silent. Then the giant burst forth in
curses, and the shepherd spoke, "Don't do that, Grant. It's not
like you, lad. You cannot help your trouble that way."

Young Matt turned over to face his friend; "I know it, Dad;" he
growled defiantly; "but I just got to say somethin'; I ain't
meanin' no disrespect to God 'lmighty, and I reckon He ought to
know it; but--" he broke forth again.

Pete drew back in alarm. "Look your trouble in the face, lad,"
said the shepherd; "don't let it get you down like this."

"Look it in the face!" roared the other. "Good God! that's just
it! ain't I a lookin' it in the face every day? You don't know
about it, Dad. If you did, you--you'd cuss too." He started in
again.

"I know more than you think, Grant," said the other, when the big
fellow had stopped swearing to get his breath. While he spoke, the
shepherd was looking away along the Old Trail. "There comes your
trouble now," he added, pointing to a girl on a brown pony, coming
slowly out of the timber near the deer lick. The young man made no
reply. Pete, at sight of the girl, started to his feet, but the
big fellow pulled him down again, and made the boy understand that
he must not betray their position.

When Sammy reached the sheep, she checked her pony, and searched
the hillside with her eyes, while her clear call went over the
mountain, "Oh--h--h--Dad!"

Young Matt shook his head savagely at his companion, and even
Brave was held silent by a low "Be still" from his master.

Again Sammy looked carefully on every side, but lying on the
higher ground, and partly hidden by the trees, the little group
could not be seen. When there was no answer to her second call,
the girl drew a letter from her pocket, and, permitting the pony
to roam at will, proceeded to read.

The big man, looking on, cursed again beneath his breath. "It's
from Ollie," he whispered to his companions. "She stopped at the
house. He says his uncle will give me a job in the shops, and that
it'll be fine for me, 'cause Ollie will be my boss himself. He my
boss! Why, dad burn his sneakin' little soul, I could crunch him
with one hand. I'd see him in hell before I'd take orders from
him. I told her so, too," he finished savagely.

"And what did she say?" asked the shepherd quietly, his eyes on
the girl below.

"Just said, kind o' short like, that she reckoned I could. Then I
come away."

The girl finished her letter, and, after another long call for
Dad, moved on over the shoulder of the mountain. Pete, who had
withdrawn a little way from his companions, was busily talking in
his strange manner to his unseen friends.

Then Young Matt opened his heart to the shepherd and told him all.
It was the old, old story; and, as Mr. Howitt listened, dreams
that he had thought dead with the death of his only son, stirred
again in his heart, and his deep voice was vibrant with emotion as
he sought to comfort the lad who had come to him.

While they talked, the sun dropped until its lower edge touched
the top of the tallest pine on Wolf Ridge, and the long shadows
lay over the valley below. "I'm mighty sorry I let go and cuss,
Dad," finished, the boy. "But I keep a holdin' in, and a holdin'
in, 'til I'm plumb wild; then something happens like that letter,
and I go out on the range and bust. I've often wished you knowed.
Seems like your just knowin' about it will help me to hold on. I
get scared at myself sometimes, Dad, I do, honest."

"I'm glad, too, that you have told me, Grant. It means more to me
than you can guess. I--I had a boy once, you know. He was like
you. He would have come to me this way, if he had lived."

The sheep had begun working toward the lower ground. The shepherd
rose to his feet. "Take them home, Brave. Come on, boys, you must
eat with me at the ranch, to-night." Then the three friends, the
giant mountaineer, the strangely afflicted youth, and the old
scholar went down the mountain side together.

As they disappeared in the timber on the lower level, the bushes,
near which they had been sitting, parted silently, and a man's
head and shoulders appeared from behind a big rook. The man
watched the strange companions out of sight. Then the bushes
swayed together, and the mountain seemed to have swallowed him up.

The three friends had just finished their supper when Pete saw
Sammy entering the ranch clearing. Young Matt caught up his hat.
At the rear door he paused. "I've got to go now, Dad," he said
awkwardly. "I can't see her any more to-day. But if you'll let me,
I'll come again when things get too hot."

The shepherd held out his hand, "I understand. Come always, my
boy."

The big fellow, with Pete, skipped away into the timber at the
rear of the cabin, a moment before Sammy appeared at the open door
in front.


CHAPTER XIII.

SAMMY LANE'S AMBITION.


"Law sakes!" cried Sammy, looking at the table. "You don't use all
them dishes, do you, Dad? You sure must eat a lot."

"Oh, I eat enough," laughed Mr. Howitt; "but it happens that I had
company this evening. Young Matt and Pete were here for supper."
He brought two chairs outside the cabin.

"Shucks!" exclaimed Sammy, as she seated herself, and removed her
sunbonnet; "they must've eat and run. Wish'd I'd got here sooner.
Young Matt run away from me this afternoon. And I wanted to see
him 'bout Mandy Ford's party next week. I done promised Mandy that
I'd bring him. I reckon he'd go with me if I asked him."

"There is not the least doubt about that," observed the man; "I'm
sure anyone would be glad for such charming company."

The girl looked up suspiciously; "Are you a jokin'?" she said.

"Indeed, I am not; I am very much in earnest." Then, taking a cob
pipe from his pocket, he added, politely, "May I smoke?"

"Heh? O law! yes. What you ask me for?" She watched him curiously,
as he filled and lighted the pipe. "I reckon that's because you
was raised in the city," he added slowly; "is that the way folks
do there?"

"Folks smoke here, sometimes, do they not?" he returned between
puffs.

"I don't mean that. Course they smoke and chew, too. And the women
dip snuff, some of 'em. Aunt Mollie Matthews don't, though, and I
ain't never goin' to, 'cause she don't. But nobody don't ask
nobody else if they can. They just go ahead. That ain't the only
way you're different from us, though," she continued, looking at
Mr. Howitt, with that wide questioning gaze. "You're different in
a heap o' ways. 'Tain't that you wear different clothes, for you
don't, no more. Nor, 'taint that you act like you were any
better'n us. I don't know what it is, but it's somethin'. Take
your stayin' here in Mutton Hollow, now; honest, Dad, ain't you
afear'd to stay here all alone at nights?"

"Afraid? afraid of what?" he looked at her curiously.

"Hants," said the girl, lowering her voice; "down there." She
pointed toward the old ruined cabin under the bluff. "SHE'S sure
been seen there. What if HE was to come, too? Don't you believe in
hants?"

The shepherd's face was troubled, as he answered, "I don't know,
Sammy. I scarcely know what I believe. Some marvelous experiences
are related by apparently reliable authorities; but I have always
said that I could not accept the belief. I--I am not so sure now.
After all, the unseen world is not so very far away. Strange
forces, of which we know nothing, are about us everywhere. I dare
not say that I do not believe."

"But you ain't scared?"

"Why should I fear?"

Sammy shook her head. "Ain't 'nother man or woman in the whole
country would dast spend the night here, Dad; except Pete, of
course. Not even Young Matt, nor my Daddy would do it; and I don't
guess they're afraid of anything--anything that's alive, I mean.
You're sure different, Dad; plumb different. I reckon it must be
the city that does it. And that's what I've come to see you about
this evenin'. You see Ollie's been a tellin' me a lot about folks
and things way over there." She waived her hand toward the ridges
that shut in the Hollow. "And Ollie he's changed a heap himself
since he went there to live. I got a letter to-day, and, when I
went home, I hunted up the first one he wrote, and I can tell
there's a right smart difference already. You know all about Ollie
and me goin' to get married, I reckon?"

Mr. Howitt admitted that he had heard something of that nature;
and Sammy nodded, "I 'lowed you'd know. But you don't know how
mighty proud and particular Ollie always is. I figure that bein'
in the city with all them one folks ain't goin' to make him any
less that way than he was. And if he stays there and keeps on a
changin', and I stay here, and don't change none, why it might be
that I--I--" She faltered and came to a dead stop, twisting her
bonnet strings nervously in her confusion. "Ollie he ain't like
Young Matt, nohow," she said again. "Such as that wouldn't make no
difference with him. But Ollie--well you see--"

There was a twinkle, now, in the shepherd's eye, as he answered;
"Yes, I see; I am quite sure that I see."

The girl continued; "You know all about these things, Dad. And
there ain't nobody else here that does. Will you learn me to be a
sure 'nough lady, so as Ollie won't--so he won't--" Again she
paused in confusion. It was evident, from the look on Mr. Howitt's
face, that, whatever he saw, it was not this.

"I feel somehow like I could do it, if I had a chance," she
murmured.

There was no answer. After a time, Sammy stole a look at her quiet
companion. What could the man in the chair be thinking about? His
pipe was neglected; his gray head bowed.

"Course," said the young woman, with just a little lifting of her
chin; "Course, if I couldn't never learn, there ain't no use to
try."

The old scholar raised his head and looked long at the girl. Her
splendid form, glowing with the rich life and strength of the
wilderness, showed in every line the proud old southern blood.
Could she learn to be a fine lady? Mr. Howitt thought of the women
of the cities, pale, sickly, colorless, hot-house posies, beside
this mountain flower. What would this beautiful creature be, had
she their training? What would she gain? What might she not lose?
Aloud he said, "My dear child, do you know what it is that you
ask?"

Sammy hung her head, abashed at his serious tone. "I 'lowed it
would be right smart trouble for you," she said. "But I could let
you have Brownie in pay; he ain't only five year old, and is as
sound as a button. He's all I've got, Mr. Howitt. But I'd be
mighty proud to swap him to you."

"My girl, my girl," said the shepherd, "you misunderstand me. I
did not mean that. It would be a pleasure to teach you. I was
thinking how little you realized what the real life of the city is
like, and how much you have that the 'fine ladies,' as you call
them, would give fortunes for, and how little they have after all
that could add one ray of brightness to your life."

Sammy laughed aloud, as she cried, "Me got anything that anybody
would want? Why, Dad, I ain't got nothin' but Brownie, and my
saddle, and--and that's all. I sure ain't got nothing to lose."

The man smiled in sympathy. Then slowly a purpose formed in his
mind. "And if you should lose, you will never blame me?" he said
at last.

"Never, never," she promised eagerly.

"Alright, it is a bargain. I will help you."

The girl sprang to her feet. "I knew you would. I knew you would.
I was plumb sure you would," she cried, fairly quivering with life
and excitement. "It's got to be a sure 'nough lady, Dad. I want to
be a really truly fine lady, like them Ollie tells about in his
letters, you know."

"Yes, Sammy. I understand, a 'sure enough' lady, and we will do
it, I am sure. But it will take a great deal of hard work on your
part, though."

"I reckon it will," she returned soberly, coming back to her seat.
Then drawing her chair a little closer, she leaned toward her
teacher, "Begin now," she commanded. "Tell me what I must do
first."

Mr. Howitt carefully searched his pockets for a match, and lighted
his pipe again, before he said, "First you must know what a 'sure
enough' lady is. You see, Sammy, there are several kinds of women
who call themselves ladies, but are not real ladies after all; and
they all look very much like the 'sure enough' kind; that is, they
look like them to most people."

Sammy nodded, "Just like them Thompsons down by Flat Rock. They're
all mighty proud, 'cause they come from Illinois the same as the
Matthews's. You'd think to hear 'em that Old Matt couldn't near
run the ranch without 'em, and some folks, strangers like, might
believe it. But we all know they ain't nothing but just low down
trash, all the time, and no better than some of them folks over on
the Bend."

The shepherd smiled, "Something like that. I see you understand.
Now a real lady, Sammy, is a lady in three ways: First, in her
heart; I mean just to herself, in the things that no one but she
could ever know. A 'sure enough' lady does not PRETEND to be; she
IS."

Again the girl broke in eagerly, "That's just like Aunt Mollie,
ain't it? Couldn't no one ever have a finer lady heart than her."

"Indeed, you are right," agreed the teacher heartily. "And that is
the thing that lies at the bottom of it all, Sammy. The lady heart
comes first."

"I won't never forget that," she returned. "I couldn't forget Aunt
Mollie, nohow. Tell me more, Dad."

"Next, the 'sure enough' lady must have a lady mind. She must know
how to think and talk about the things that really matter. All the
fine dresses and jewels in the world can't make a real lady, if
she does not think, or if she thinks only of things that are of no
value. Do you see?"

Again the girl nodded, and, with a knowing smile, answered
quickly, "I know a man like that. And I see now that that is what
makes him so different from other folks. It's the things he thinks
about all to himself that does it. But I've got a heap to learn, I
sure have. I could read alright, if I had something to read, and I
reckon I could learn to talk like you if I tried hard enough. What
else is there?"

Then, continued the shepherd, "A lady will keep her body as strong
and as beautiful as she can, for this is one way that she
expresses her heart and mind. Do you see what I mean?"

Sammy answered slowly, "I reckon I do. You mean I mustn't get
stooped over and thin chested, and go slouching around, like so
many of the girls and women around here do, and I mustn't let my
clothes go without buttons, 'cause I am in a hurry, and I must
always comb my hair, and keep my hands as white as I can. Is that
it?"

"That's the idea," said the shepherd.

Sammy gazed ruefully at a large rent in her skirt, and at a shoe
half laced. Then she put up a hand to her tumbled hair. "I--I
didn't think it made any difference, when only home folks was
around," she said.

"That's just it, my child," said the old man gently. "I think a
'sure enough' lady would look after these things whether there was
anyone to see her or not; just for herself, you know. And this is
where you can begin. I will send for some books right away, and
when they come we will begin to train your mind."

"But the heart, how'll I get a lady heart, Dad?"

"How does the violet get its perfume, Sammy? Where does the rose
get its color? How does the bird learn to sing its song?"

For a moment she was puzzled. Then her face lighted; "I see!" she
exclaimed. "I'm just to catch it from folks like Aunt Mollie, and--and
someone else I know. I'm just to BE, not to make believe or let on
like I was, but to BE a real lady inside. And then I'm to learn how to
talk and look, like I know myself to be." She drew a long breath as
she rose to go. "It'll be mighty hard, Dad, in some ways; but it'll
sure be worth it all when I get out 'mong the folks. I'm mighty
thankful to you, I sure am. And I hope you won't never be sorry you
promised to help me."

As the girl walked swiftly away through the thickening dusk of the
evening, the shepherd watched her out of sight; then turned toward
the corral for a last look at the sheep, to see that all was right
for the night. "Brave, old fellow," he said to the dog who trotted
by his side; "are we going to make another mistake, do you think?
We have made so many, so many, you know." Brave looked up into the
master's face, and answered with his low bark, as though to
declare his confidence. "Well, well, old dog, I hope you are
right. The child has a quick mind, and a good heart; and, if I am
not mistaken, good blood. We shall see. We shall see."

Suddenly the dog whirled about, the hair on his back bristling as
he gave a threatening growl. A man on a dun colored mule was
coming up the road.


CHAPTER XIV.

THE COMMON YELLER KIND.


Mr. Howitt stood quietly by the corral gate when the horseman rode
up. It was Wash Gibbs, on his way home from an all day visit with
friends on the river.

When the big mountaineer took the short cut through Mutton Hollow,
he thought to get well past the ranch before the light failed. No
matter how well fortified with the courage distilled by his
friend, Jennings, the big man would never have taken the trail by
the old ruined cabin alone after dark. He had evidently been
riding at a good pace, for his mule's neck and flanks were wet
with sweat. Gibbs, himself, seemed greatly excited, and one hand
rested on the pistol at his hip, as he pulled up in front of the
shepherd.

Without returning Mr. Howitt's greeting, he pointed toward the two
empty chairs in front of the house, demanding roughly, "Who was
that with you before you heard me comin'?"

"Sammy Lane was here a few minutes ago," replied the shepherd.

Gibbs uttered an oath, "She was, was she? Well, who was th' man?"

"There was no man," returned the other. "Young Matt and Pete were
here for supper, but they went as soon as the meal was finished,
before Sammy came."

"Don't you try to lie to me!" exclaimed the big man, with another
burst of language, and a threatening movement with the hand that
rested on the pistol.

Mr. Howitt was startled. Never in his life before had such words
been addressed to him. He managed to reply with quiet dignity, "I
have no reason for deceiving you, or anyone else, Mr. Gibbs. There
has been no man here but myself, since Matt and Pete left after
supper." The shepherd's manner carried conviction, and Gibbs
hesitated, evidently greatly perplexed. During the pause, Brave
growled again, and faced toward the cliff below the corral, his
hair bristling.

"What's th' matter with that dog?" said Gibbs, turning uneasily in
his saddle, to face in the direction the animal was looking.

"What is it, Brave?" said Mr. Howitt. The only answer was an
uneasy whine, followed by another growl, all of which said
plainly, in dog talk, "I don't know what it is, but there is
something over there on that cliff that I don't like."

"It must be some animal," said the shepherd.

"Ain't no animal that makes a dog act like that. Did any body pass
while you was a sittin' there, jest before I come in sight?"

"Not a soul," answered the other. "Did you meet someone down the
road?"

The big man looked at the shepherd hard before he answered, in a
half-frightened, half-bullying tone, "I seed something in th' road
yonder, an' hit disappeared right by th' old shack under th'
bluffs." He twisted around in his saddle again, facing the cliff
with its dense shadows and dim twilight forms, as he muttered, "If
I was only right sure, I--" Then swinging back he leaned toward
the man on the ground; "Look a here, Mister. There's them that
'lows there's things in this here Holler t' be afeared of, an' I
reckon hit's so. There's sure been hell t' pay at that there cabin
down yonder. I ain't a sayin' what hit was I seed, but if hit war
anywhere else, I'd a said hit was a man; but if hit was a man, I
don't know why you didn't see him when he come past; er else
you're a lyin'. I jest want t' tell you, you're right smart of a
stranger in these here parts, even if you have been a workin' fer
Ol' Matt all summer. You're too blame careful 'bout talkin' 'bout
yourself, or tellin' whar you come from, t' suit some folks. Some
strangers are alright, an' again some ain't. But we don't aim t'
have nobody in this here neighborhood what jumps into th' brush
when they see an honest man a comin'."

As he finished speaking, Gibbs straightened himself in the saddle,
and before Mr. Howitt could reply, the dun mule, at a touch of the
spur, had dashed away up the road in the direction taken by Sammy
Lane.

It was quite dark in the heavy timber of the Hollow by the time
Sammy had reached the edge of the open ground on the hill side,
but once on the higher level, clear of the trees, the strong glow
of the western sky still lighted the way. From here it was not far
to the girl's home, and, as she climbed a spur of Dewey, Sammy saw
the cabin, and heard distinctly the sweet strain's of her father's
violin. On top of the rise, the young woman paused a moment to
enjoy the beauties of the evening, which seemed to come to her
with a new meaning that night. As she stood there, her strong
young figure was clearly outlined against the sky to the man who
was riding swiftly along the road over which she had just passed.

Sammy turned when she heard the quick beating of the mule's feet;
then, recognizing the huge form of the horseman, as he came out of
the woods into the light, she started quickly away towards her
home; but the mule and its rider were soon beside her.

"Howdy, Sammy." Gibbs leaped from the saddle, and, with the bridle
rein over his arm, came close to the girl. "Fine evening for a
walk."

"Howdy," returned the young woman, coolly, quickening her pace.

"You needn't t' be in such a powerful hurry," growled Wash. "If
you've got time t' talk t' that old cuss at th' ranch, you sure
got time t' talk t' me."

Sammy turned angrily. "You'd better get back on your mule, and go
about your business, Wash Gibbs. When I want you to walk with me,
I'll let you know."

"That's alright, honey," exclaimed the other insolently. "I'm a
goin' your way just th' same; an' we'll mosey 'long t'gether. I
was a goin' home, but I've got business with your paw now."

"Worse thing for Daddy, too," flashed the girl. "I wish you'd stay
away from him."

Wash laughed; "Your daddy couldn't keep house 'thout me, nohow.
Who was that feller talkin' with you an' th' old man down yonder?"

"There wasn't nobody talkin' to us," replied Sammy shortly.

"That's what he said, too," growled Gibbs; "but I sure seed
somebody a sneakin' into th' brush when I rode up. I thought when
I was down there hit might o' been a hant; but I know hit was a
man, now. There's somethin' mighty funny a goin' on around here,
since that feller come int' th' neighborhood; an' he'll sure find
somethin' in Mutton Holler more alive than Ol' Matt's gal if he
ain't careful."

The girl caught her breath quickly. She knew the big ruffian's
methods, and with good reason feared for her old friend, should he
even unconsciously incur the giant's displeasure.

As they drew near the house, Wash continued, "Young Matt he was
there too. Let me tell you I ain't forgot 'bout his big show at
th' mill last spring; he'll have t' do a heap better'n he done
then, when I get 'round t' him."

Sammy laughed scornfully, "'Pears like you ain't been in no hurry
t' try it on. I ain't heard tell of Young Matt's leaving th'
country yet. You'd better stay away from Jennings' still though,
when you do try it." Then, while the man was tying his mule to the
fence, she ran into the cabin to greet her father with a
hysterical sob that greatly astonished Jim. Before explanations
could be made, a step was heard approaching the door, and Sammy
had just time to say, "Wash Gibbs," in answer to her father's
inquiring look, when the big man entered. Mr. Lane arose to hang
his violin on its peg.

"Don't stop fer me, Jim," said the newcomer. "Jest let her go. Me
an' Sammy's been havin' a nice little walk, an' some right peart
music would sound mighty fine." Gibbs was angered beyond reason at
Sammy's last words, or he would have exercised greater care.

Sammy's father made no reply until the girl had left the room, but
whatever it was that his keen eye read in his daughter's face, it
made him turn to his guest with anything but a cordial manner, and
there was that in his voice that should have warned the other.

"So you and Sammy went for a walk, did you?"

"She was comin' home from th' sheep ranch, an' I caught up with
her," explained Gibbs. "I 'lowed as how she needed company, so I
come 'long. I seemed t' be 'bout as welcome as usual," he added
with an ugly grin.

"Meanin' that my girl don't want your company, and told you so?"
asked the other softly.

Wash answered with a scowl; "Sammy's gettin' too dad burned good
fer me since Ollie's uncle took him in. An' now, this here old man
from nowhere has come, it's worse than ever. She'll put a rope
'round our necks th' first thing you know."

Jim's right hand slipped quietly inside his hickory shirt, where
the button was missing, as he drawled, "My girl always was too
good for some folks. And it's about time you was a findin' it out.
She can't help it. She was born that way. She's got mighty good
blood in her veins, that girl has; and I don't aim to ever let it
be mixed up with none of the low down common yeller kind."

The deliberate purpose of the speaker was too evident to be
mistaken. The other man's hand flew to his hip almost before Mr.
Lane had finished his sentence. But Wash was not quick enough.
Like a flash Jim's hand was withdrawn from inside the hickory
shirt, and the giant looked squarely into the muzzle of Jim Lane's
ever ready, murderous weapon.

In the same even voice, without the slightest allusion to the
unfinished movement of the other, Mr. Lane continued, "I done told
you before that my girl would pick her own company, and I ain't
never feared for a minute that she'd take up with such as you.
Ollie Stewart ain't so mighty much of a man, maybe, but he's
clean, he is, and the stock's pretty good. Now you can just listen
to me, or you can mosey out of that door, and the next time we
meet, we will settle it for good, without any further
arrangement."

As Sammy's father talked, the big figure of his visitor relaxed,
and when Jim had finished his slow speech, Wash was leaning
forward with his elbows on his knees, his hands clasped in front.
"We ain't got no call t' fight, now, Jim," he said in a tone of
respect. "We got something else t' think about; an' that's what I
come here fer t'night. I didn't aim t', 'til I seed what I did at
th' ranch down yonder. I tell you hit's time we was a doin'
somethin'."

At this, Mr. Lane's face and manner changed quickly. He put up his
weapon, and the two men drew their chairs close together, as
though Death had not a moment before stretched forth his hand to
them.

For an hour they sat talking in low tones. Sammy in the next room
had heard the conversation up to this point, but now only an
occasional word reached her ears. Gibbs seemed to be urging some
action, and her father was as vigorously protesting. "I tell you,
Jim, hit's th' only safe way. You didn't use t' be so squeamish."
Several times the old shepherd was mentioned, and also the
stranger whom Wash had seen that evening. And once, the trembling
girl heard Young Matt's name. At length the guest rose to go, and
Mr. Lane walked with him to the gate. Even after the big man was
mounted, the conversation still continued; Wash still urging and
Jim still protesting.

When his visitor was gone, Mr. Lane came slowly back to the house.
Extinguishing the light, he seated himself in the open doorway,
and filled his pipe. Sammy caught the odor of tobacco, and a
moment later Jim heard a light, quick step on the floor behind
him. Then two arms went around his neck; "What is it, Daddy? What
is it? Why don't you drive that man away?"

"Did you hear us talkin'?" asked the man, an anxious note in his
voice.

"I heard you talkin' to him about pesterin' me, but after that,
you didn't talk so loud. What is the matter, Daddy, that he could
stay and be so thick with you after the things you said? I was
sure he'd make you kill him."

Jim laughed softly; "You're just like your mother, girl. Just like
her, with the old blood a backin' you up." Then he asked a number
of questions about Mr. Howitt, and her visit to the ranch that
evening.

As Sammy told him of her ambition to fit herself for the place
that would be hers, when she married, and repeating the things
that Mr. Howitt had told her, explained how the shepherd had
promised to help, Jim expressed his satisfaction and delight. "I
knowed you was a studyin' about something, girl," he said, "but I
didn't say nothin', 'cause I 'lowed you'd tell me when you got
ready."

"I didn't want to say nothing 'til I was sure, you see," replied
the daughter. "I aimed to tell you as soon as I got home to-night,
but Wash Gibbs didn't give me no chance."

The man held her close "Dad Howitt sure puts the thing just right,
Sammy. It'll be old times come back, when you're a lady in your
own house with all your fine friends around; and you'll do it,
girl; you sure will. Don't never be afraid to bank on the old
blood. It'll see you through." Then his voice broke; "You won't
never be learned away from your old Daddy, will you, honey? Will
you always stand by Daddy, like you do now? Will you let me and
Young Matt slip 'round once in a while, just to look at, you, all
so fine?"

"Daddy Jim, if you don't--hush--I'll--I'll--" she hid her face on
his shoulder.

"There, there, honey; I was only funnin'. You'll always be my
Sammy; the only boy I ever had. You just naturally couldn't be
nothin' else."

Long after his daughter had gone to her room and to her bed, the
mountaineer sat in the doorway, looking into the dark. He heard
the short bark of a fox in the brush back of the stable; and the
wild cry of a catamount from a cliff farther down the mountain was
answered by another from the timber below the spring. He saw the
great hills heaving their dark forms into the sky, and in his soul
he felt the spirit of the wilderness and the mystery of the hour.
At last he went into the house to close and bar the door.

Away down in Mutton Hollow a dog barked, and high up on Old Dewey
near Sammy's Lookout, a spot of light showed for a moment, then
vanished.


CHAPTER XV.

THE PARTY AT FORD'S.


Young Matt would have found some excuse for staying at home the
night of the party at Ford's, but the shepherd said he must go.

The boy felt that the long evening with Sammy would only hurt. He
reasoned with himself that it would be better for him to see as
little as possible of the girl who was to marry Ollie Stewart.
Nevertheless, he was singing as he saddled the big white faced
sorrel to ride once more over the trail that is nobody knows how
old.

Mr. Lane was leading the brown pony from the stable as Young Matt
rode up to the gate; and from the doorway of the cabin Sammy
called to say that she would be ready in a minute.

"Ain't seen you for a coon's age, boy," said Jim, while they were
waiting for the girl. "Why don't you never come down the Old Trail
no more?"

The big fellow's face reddened, as he answered, "I ain't been
nowhere, Jim. 'Pears like I just can't get away from the place no
more; we're that busy."

Sammy's father looked his young neighbor squarely in the eye with
that peculiar searching gaze; "Look a here, Grant. I've knowed you
ever since you was born, and you ought to know me a little.
'Tain't your way to dodge, and 'tain't mine. I reckon you know
you're welcome, same as always, don't you?"

Young Matt returned the other's look fairly; "I ain't never
doubted it, Jim. But things is a heap different now, since it's
all done and settled, with Ollie gone."

The two understood each other perfectly. Said Jim, drawing a long
breath, "Well I wish you'd come over just the same, anyway. It
can't do nobody no harm as I can see."

"It wouldn't do me no good," replied the young man.

"Maybe not," assented Jim. "But I'd like mighty well to have you
come just the same." Then he drew closer to his young friend;
"I've been aimin' to ride over and see you, Matt; but Sammy said
you was a comin' this evenin', and I 'lowed this would be soon
enough. I reckon you know what Wash Gibbs is tellin' he aims to do
first chance he gets."

The giant drew himself up with a grim smile, "I've heard a good
bit, Jim. But you don't need to mind about me; I know I ain't
quite growed, but I am a growin'."

The older man surveyed the great form of the other with a critical
eye, as he returned, "Durned if I don't believe you'd push him
mighty close, if he'd only play fair. But--but I 'lowed you ought
to know it was a comin'."

"I have knowed it for a long time," said the other cheerfully;
"but I heard 'Preachin' Bill' say once, that if a feller don't
fuss about what he knows for sure, the things he don't know ain't
apt to bother him none. It's this here guessin' that sure gets a
man down."

"'Preachin' Bill' hits it every pop, don't he?" exclaimed Jim,
admiringly. "But there's somethin' else you ought to know, too,
Matt. Wash has done made his threats agin the old man down there."

"You mean Dad Howitt?" said Young Matt, sharply. "What's Wash got
agin Dad, Jim?"

Mr. Lane shifted uneasily, "Some fool notion of hisn. You mind old
man Lewis, I reckon?"

The big man's muscles tightened. "Dad told us about his stoppin'
at the ranch the other night. Wash Gibbs better keep his hands off
Mr. Howitt."

"I ain't told nobody about this, Grant, and you can do as you like
about tellin' your father, and the old man. But if anything
happens, get word to me, quick."

Before more could be said, Sammy appeared in the doorway, and soon
the two young people were riding on their way. Long after they had
passed from sight in the depth of the forest, the dark mountaineer
stood at the big gate, looking in the direction they had gone.

Young Matt was like a captive, tugging at his bonds. Mr. Lane's
words had stirred the fire, and the girl's presence by his side
added fuel to the flame. He could not speak. He dared not even
look at her, but rode with his eyes fixed upon the ground, where
the sunlight fell in long bars of gold. Sammy, too, was silent.
She felt something that was strangely like fear, when she found
herself alone with her big neighbor. Now and then she glanced
timidly up at him and tried to find some word with which to break
the silence. She half wished that she had not come. So they rode
together through the lights and shadows down into the valley, the
only creatures in all the free life of the forest who were not
free.

At last the girl spoke, "It's mighty good of you to take me over
to Mandy's to-night. There ain't no one else I could o' gone
with." There was no reply, and Sammy, seeming not to notice,
continued talking in a matter-of-fact tone that soon--for such is
the way of a woman--won him from his mood, and the two chatted
away like the good comrades they had always been.

Just after they had crossed Fall Creek at Slick Rock Ford, some
two miles below the mill, Young Matt leaned from his saddle, and
for a little way studied the ground carefully. When he sat erect
again, he remarked, with the air of one who had reached a
conclusion, "Wouldn't wonder but there'll be doin's at Ford's to-
night, sure enough."

"There's sure to be," returned the girl; "everybody'll be there.
Mandy's folks from over on Long Creek are comin', and some from
the mouth of the James. Mandy wanted Daddy to play for 'em, but he
says he can't play for parties no more, and they got that old
fiddlin' Jake from the Flag neighborhood, I guess."

"There'll be somethin' a heap more excitin' than fiddlin' and
dancin', accordin' to my guess," returned Young Matt.

"What do you mean?" asked Sammy.

Her escort pointed to the print of a mule's shoe in the soft soil
of the low bottom land. "That there's Wash Gibbs's dun mule, and
he's headed down the creek for Jennings's still. Wash'll meet a
lot of his gang from over on the river, and like's not they'll go
from there to the party. I wish your dad was goin' to do the
playin' to-night."

It was full dark before they reached the Ford clearing. The faint,
far away sound of a violin, seeming strange and out of place in
the gloomy solitude of the great woods, first told them that other
guests had already arrived. Then as they drew nearer and the tones
of the instrument grew louder, they could hear the rhythmic swing
and beat of heavily shod feet upon the rough board floors, with
the shrill cries of the caller, and the half savage, half pathetic
sing-song of the backwoods dancers, singing, "Missouri Gal."

Reaching the edge of the clearing, they involuntarily checked
their horses, stopping just within the shadow of the timber. Here
the sound of the squeaking fiddle, the shouting caller, the
stamping feet, and the swinging dancers came with full force; and,
through the open door and windows of the log house, they could see
the wheeling, swaying figures of coatless men and calico gowned
women, while the light, streaming out, opened long lanes in the
dusk. About them in the forest's edge, standing in groups under
the trees, were the shadowy forms of saddle horses and mules, tied
by their bridle reins to the lower branches; and nearer to the
cabin, two or three teams, tied to the rail-fence, stood hitched
to big wagons in which were splint-bottom chairs for extra seats.

During the evening, the men tried in their rough, good natured
way, to joke Young Matt about taking advantage of Ollie Stewart's
absence, but they very soon learned that, while the big fellow was
ready to enter heartily into all the fun of the occasion, he would
not receive as a jest any allusion to his relation to the girl,
whom he had escorted to the party. Sammy, too, when her big
companion was not near, suffered from the crude wit of her
friends.

"Ollie Stewart don't own me yet," she declared with a toss of the
head, when someone threatened to write her absent lover.

"No," replied one of her tormentors, "but you ain't aimin' to miss
your chance o' goin' t' th' city t' live with them big-bugs."

In the laugh that followed, Sammy was claimed by a tall woodsman
for the next dance, and escaped to take her place on the floor.

"Well, Ollie'll sure make a good man for her," remarked another
joker; "if he don't walk th' chalk, she can take him 'cross her
knee an' wallop him."

"She'll surely marry him, alright," said the first, "'cause he's
got th' money, but she's goin' t' have a heap o' fun makin' Young
Matt play th' fool before she leaves th' woods. He ain't took his
eyes off her t'night. Everybody's laughin' at him."

"I notice they take mighty good care t' laugh behind his back,"
flashed little black-eyed Annie Brooke from the Cove neighborhood.

Young Matt, who had been dancing with Mandy Ford, came up behind
the group just in time to hear their remarks. Two or three who saw
him within hearing tried to warn the speakers, but while everybody
around them saw the situation, the two men caught the frantic
signals of their friends too late. The music suddenly stopped. The
dancers were still. By instinct every eye in the room was fixed
upon the little group, as the jokers turned to face the object of
their jests.

The big mountaineer took one long step toward the two who had
spoken, his brow dark with rage, his huge fists clenched. But,
even as his powerful muscles contracted for the expected blow, the
giant came to a dead stop. Slowly his arm relaxed. His hand
dropped to his side. Then, turning deliberately, he walked to the
door, the silent crowd parting to give him way.

As the big man stepped from the room, a gasp of astonishment
escaped from the company, and the two jokers, with frightened
faces, broke into a shrill, nervous laughter. Then a buzz of talk
went round; the fiddlers struck up again; the callers shouted; the
dancers stamped, and bowed, and swung their partners as they sang.

And out in the night under the trees, at the edge of the gloomy
forest, the strongest man in the hills was saying over and over to
the big, white faced sorrel, "I don't dare do it. I don't dare.
Dad Howitt wouldn't. He sure wouldn't."

Very soon two figures left the house, and hurried toward a bunch
of saddle horses near by. They had untied their animals, and were
about to mount, when suddenly a huge form stepped from the shadows
to their horses' heads. "Put up your guns, boys," said Young Matt
calmly. "I reckon you know that if I'd wanted trouble, it would o'
been all over before this."

The weapons were not drawn, and the big man continued, "Dad Howitt
says a feller always whips himself every time he fights when there
ain't no--no principle evolved. I don't guess Dad would see ary
principle in this, 'cause there might be some truth in what you
boys said. I reckon I am somethin' at playin' a fool, but it would
o' been a heap safer for you to let folks find it out for
themselves."

"We all were jest a foolin', Matt," muttered one.

"That's alright," returned the big fellow; "But you'd better tie
up again and go back into the house and dance a while longer.
Folks might think you was scared if you was to leave so soon."


CHAPTER XVI.

ON THE WAY HOME.


Not until the party was breaking up, and he saw Sammy in the
doorway, did Young Matt go back to the house.

When they had ridden again out of the circle of light, and the
laughter and shouting of the guests was no longer heard, Sammy
tried in vain to arouse her silent escort, chatting gaily about
the pleasures of the evening. But all the young man's reserve had
returned. When she did force him to speak, his responses were so
short and cold that at last the girl, too, was silent. Then, man-
like, he wished she would continue talking.

By the time they reached Compton Ridge the moon was well up. For
the last two miles Sammy had been watching the wavering shafts of
light that slipped through tremulous leaves and swaying branches.
As they rode, a thousand fantastic shapes appeared and vanished
along the way, and now and then as the sound of their horses' feet
echoed through the silent forest, some wild thing in the
underbrush leaped away into the gloomy depth.

Coming out on top of the narrow ridge, the brown pony crowded
closer to the big, white faced sorrel, and the girl, stirred by
the weird loveliness of the scene, broke the silence with an
exclamation, "O Matt! Ain't it fine? Look there!" She pointed to
the view
ahead. "Makes me feel like I could keep on a goin', and goin', and
never stop."

The man, too, felt the witchery of the night. The horses were
crowding
more closely together now, and, leaning forward, the girl looked
up into his face; "What's
the matter, Matt? Why don't you talk to me? You know it ain't true
what them folks said back there."

The sorrel was jerked farther away. "It's true enough, so far as
it touches me," returned the man shortly. "When are you goin' to
the city?"

"I don't know," she replied. "Let's don't talk about that to-
night. I don't want even to think about it, not to-night. You--you
don't believe what they was a sayin', Matt; you know you don't.
You mustn't ever believe such as that. I--I never could get along
without you and Aunt Mollie and Uncle Matt, nohow." The brown pony
was again crowding closer to his mate. The girl laid a hand on her
companion's arm. "Say you don't blame me for what they said, Matt.
You know I wouldn't do no such a thing even if I could. There
mustn't anything ever come between you and me; never--never. I--I
want us always to be like we are now. You've been so good to me
ever since I was a little trick, and you whipped big Lem Wheeler
for teasin' me. I--I don't guess I could get along without knowin'
you was around somewhere." She finished with a half sob.

It was almost too much. The man swung around in his saddle, and
the horses, apparently of their own accord, stopped. Without a
word, the big fellow stretched forth his arms, and the girl, as if
swept by a force beyond her control, felt herself swaying toward
him.

The spell was broken by the trampling of horses and the sound of
loud voices. For a moment they held their places, motionless, as
if rudely awakened from a dream. The sound was coming nearer. Then
Young Matt spoke, "It's Wash Gibbs and his crowd from the still.
Ride into the brush quick."

There was no time for flight. In the bright moonlight, they would
have been easily recognized, and a wild chase would have followed.
Leaving the road, they forced their horses into a thick clump of
bushes, where they dismounted, to hold the animals by their heads.
Scarcely had they gained this position when the first of the crowd
reached the spot where they had been a moment before. Wash Gibbs
was easily distinguished by his gigantic form, and with him were
ten others, riding two and two, several of whom were known to
Young Matt as the most lawless characters in the country. All were
fired by drink and were laughing and talking, with now and then a
burst of song, or a vulgar jest.

"I say, Wash," called one, "What'll you do if Young Matt's there?"
The unseen listeners could not hear the leader's reply; but those
about the speaker laughed and shouted with great glee. Then the
two in the bushes distinctly heard the last man in the line ask
his companion, "Do you reckon he'll put up a fight?" and as they
passed from sight, the other answered, "Wash don't aim t' give him
no show."

When the sounds had died away; Young Matt turned to the girl;
"Come on; we've got to keep 'em in sight."

But Sammy held back. "Oh, Matt, don't go yet. We must not. Didn't
you hear what that man said? It's you they're after. Let's wait
here until they're clean gone."

"No, 'tain't; they ain't a wantin' me," the big fellow replied.
And before the young woman could protest further, he lifted her to
the saddle as easily as if she were a child. Then, springing to
the back of his own horse, he led the way at a pace that would
keep them within hearing of the company of men.

"Who is it, Matt? Who is it, if it ain't you?" asked the girl.

"Don't know for sure yet, but I'll tell you pretty soon."

They had not gone far when Young Matt stopped the horse to listen
intently; and soon by the sound he could tell that the party ahead
had turned off the ridge road and were following the trail that
leads down the eastern side of the mountain. A moment longer the
mountaineer listened, as if to make sure; then he spoke; "Them
devils are goin' to the ranch after Dad Howitt. Sammy, you've got
to ride hard to-night. They won't hear you now, and they're
getting farther off every minute. There ain't no other way, and, I
know you'll do it for the old man. Get home as quick as you can
and tell Jim what's up. Tell him I'll hold 'em until he gets
there." Even as he spoke, he sprang from his horse and began
loosening the saddle girths.

"But, Matt," protested the girl; "how can you? You can't get by
them. How're you goin' to get there in time?"

"Down the mountain; short cut;" he answered as he jerked the heavy
saddle from his horse and threw it under some nearby bushes.

"But they'll kill you. You can't never face that whole crowd
alone."

"I can do it better'n Dad, and him not a lookin' for them."

Slipping the bridle from the sorrel, he turned the animal loose,
and, removing his coat and hat, laid them with the saddle. Then to
the girl on the pony he said sharply, "Go on, Sammy. Why don't you
go on? Don't you see how you're losin' time? Them devils will do
for Dad Howitt like they done for old man Lewis. Your father's the
only man can stop 'em now. Ride hard, girl, and tell Jim to hurry.
And--and, good-by, Sammy." As he finished, he spoke to her horse
and struck him such a blow that the animal sprang away.

For a moment Sammy attempted to pull up her startled pony. Then
Young Matt saw her lean forward in the saddle, and urge the little
horse to even greater speed. As they disappeared down the road,
the giant turned and ran crashing through the brush down the steep
side of the mountain. There was no path to follow. And with deep
ravines to cross, rocky bluffs to descend or scale, and, in
places, wild tangles of vines and brush and fallen trees, the trip
before him would have been a hard one even in the full light of
day. At night, it was almost impossible, and he must go like a
buck with the dogs in full cry.

When Sammy came in sight of her home, she began calling to her
father, and, as the almost exhausted horse dashed up to the big
gate, the door of the cabin opened, and Jim came running out.
Lifting his daughter from the trembling pony, he helped her into
the house, where she sobbed out her message.

At the first word, "Wash Gibbs," Jim reached for a cartridge belt,
and, by the time Sammy had finished, he had taken his Winchester
from its brackets over the fireplace. Slipping a bridle on his
horse that was feeding in the yard, he sprang upon the animal's
back without waiting for a saddle. "Stay in the cabin, girl, put
out the light, and don't open the door until I come," he said and
he was gone.

As Sammy turned back into the house, from away down in Mutton
Hollow, on the night wind, came the sound of guns.


CHAPTER XVII.

WHAT HAPPENED AT THE RANCH.


It was after midnight when Mr. Howitt was rudely awakened. The
bright moon shining through the windows lit up the interior of the
cabin and he easily recognized Young Matt standing by the bed,
with Pete, who was sleeping at the ranch that night, near by.

"Why, Matt, what is the matter?" exclaimed the shepherd, sitting
up. He could not see that the big fellow's clothing was torn, that
his hat was gone, and that he was dripping with perspiration; but
he could hear his labored breathing. Strong as he was, the young
giant was nearly exhausted by the strain of his race over the
mountains.

"Get up quick, Dad; I'll tell you while you're puttin' on your
clothes," the woodsman answered; and while the shepherd dressed,
he told him in a few words, finishing with, "Call Brave inside,
and get your gun, with all the shells you can find. Don't show a
light for a minute. They'll be here any time now, and it'll be a
good bit yet before Sammy can get home." He began fastening the
front door.

The peaceful minded scholar could not grasp the meaning of the
message; it was to him an impossible thought; "You must be
mistaken, Grant," he said. "Surely you are excited and unduly
alarmed. Wash Gibbs has no reason to attack me."

Young Matt replied gruffly, "I ain't makin' no mistake in the
woods, Dad. You ain't in the city now, and there ain't no one can
hear you holler. Don't think I am scared neither, if that's what
you mean. But there's ten of them in that bunch, and they're bad
ones. You'd better call Brave, sir. He'll be some help when it
comes to the rush."

But the other persisted, "You must be mistaken, lad. Why should
any one wish to harm me? Those men are only out fox hunting, or
something like that. If they should be coming here, it is all a
mistake; I can easily explain."

"Explain, hell!" ejaculated the mountaineer. "I ask your pardon,
Dad; but you don't know, not being raised in these woods like me.
Old man Lewis hadn't done nothing neither, and he explained, too;
only he never got through explainin'. They ain't got no reason.
They're drunk. You've never seen Wash Gibbs drunk, and to-night
he's got his whole gang with him. I don't know why he's comin'
after you, but, from what you told me 'bout his stoppin' here that
evenin', and what I've heard lately, I can guess. I know what
he'll do when he gets here, if we don't stop him. It'll be all the
same to you whether he's right or wrong."

Brave came trotting into the cabin through the rear door, and lay
down in his corner by the fireplace. "That's mighty funny," said
Young Matt. Then, as he glanced quickly around, "Where's Pete?"

The boy had slipped away while the two men were talking. Stepping
outside they called several times; but, save the "Wh-w-h-o--w-h-o-
o-o" of an owl in a big tree near the corral, there was no answer.

"The boy's alright, anyway," said the young man; "nothin' in the
woods ever hurts Pete. He's safer there than he would be here, and
I'm glad he's gone."

The shepherd did not reply. He seemed not to hear, but stood as
though fascinated by the scene. He still could not grasp the truth
of the situation, but the beauty of the hour moved him deeply.
"What a marvelous, what a wonderful sight!" he said at last in a
low tone. "I do not wonder the boy loves to roam the hills a night
like this. Look, Grant! See how soft the moonlight falls on that
patch of grass this side of the old tree yonder, and how black the
shadow is under that bush, like the mouth of a cave, a witch's
cave. I am sure there are ghosts and goblins in there, with
fairies and gnomes, and perhaps a dragon or two. And see, lad, how
the great hills rise into the sky. How grand, how beautiful the
world is! It is good to live, Matt, though life be sometimes hard,
still--still it is good to live."

At the old scholar's words and manner, the mountaineer, too,
forgot for a moment the thing that had brought him there, and a
look of awe and wonder came over his rugged features, as the
shepherd, with his face turned upward and his deep voice full of
emotion, repeated, "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the
firmament showeth his handiwork. Day unto day uttereth speech, and
night unto night showeth knowledge."

The owl left his place in the old tree and flew across the moonlit
clearing into the deeper gloom of the woods. Inside the cabin the
dog barked, and through the still night, from down the valley,
where the ranch trail crosses the creek, came the rattle of
horses' feet on the rocky floor of the little stream, and the
faint sound of voices. Young Matt started, and again the man of
the wilderness was master of the situation. "They're comin', Dad.
We ain't got no time to lose."

Re-entering the cabin, Mr. Howitt quieted the dog, while his
companion fastened the rear door, and, in the silence, while they
waited, a cricket under the corner of the house sang his plaintive
song. The sound of voices grew louder as the horses drew nearer.
Brave growled and would have barked again, but was quieted by the
shepherd, who crouched at his side, with one hand on the dog's
neck.

The older man smiled to himself. It all seemed to him so like a
child's game. He had watched the mountaineer's preparation with
amused interest, and had followed the young woodsman's directions,
even to the loaded shotgun in his hand, as one would humor a boy
in his play. The scholar's mind, trained to consider the problems
of civilization, and to recognize the dangers of the city, refused
to entertain seriously the thought that there, in the peaceful
woods, in the dead of night, a company of ruffians was seeking to
do him harm.

The voices had ceased, and the listeners heard only the sound of
the horses' feet, as the party passed the ruined cabin under the
bluff. A moment or two later the riders stopped in front of the
ranch house. Brave growled again, but was silenced by the hand on
his neck.

Young Matt was at the window. "I see them," he whispered. "They're
gettin' off their horses, and tyin' them to the corral fence." The
smile on the shepherd's face vanished, and he experienced a queer
sensation; it was as though something gripped his heart.

The other continued his whispered report; "They're bunchin' up now
under the old tree, talkin' things over. Don't know what to make
of the dog not bein' around, I reckon. Now they're takin' a drink.
It takes a lot of whiskey to help ten men jump onto one old man,
and him a stranger in the Woods. Now Wash is sendin' two of them
around to the back, so you can't slip out into the brush. Sh--h--
h, here comes a couple more to try the front door." He slipped
quietly across the room to the shepherd's side. The visitors came
softly up to the front door, and tried it gently. A moment later
the rear door was tried in the same way.

"Let Brave speak to them," whispered Young Matt; and the dog,
feeling the restraining hand removed, barked fiercely.

Mr. Howitt, following his companion's whispered instructions,
spoke aloud, "What's the matter, Brave?"

A bold knock at the front door caused the dog to redouble his
efforts, until his master commanded him to be still. "Who is
there?" called the shepherd.

"Young Matt's took powerful bad," answered a voice; "an' they want
you t' come up t' th' house, an' doctor him." A drunken laugh came
from the old tree, followed by a smothered oath.

The giant at Mr. Howitt's side growled under his breath, "Oh, I'm
sick, am I? There's them that'll be a heap sicker before mornin'.
Keep on a talkin', Dad. We've got to make all the time we can,
so's Jim can get here."

The shepherd called again, "I do not recognize your voice. You
must tell me who you are."

Outside there was a short consultation, followed by a still louder
knock; "Open up. Why don't you open up an' see who we are?" while
from under the tree came a call, "Quit your foolin' an' bring him
out o' there, you fellers." This command was followed by a still
more vigorous hammering at the door, and the threats, "Open up ol'
man. Open up, or we'll sure bust her in."

Mr. Howitt whispered to his companion, "Let me open the door and
talk to them, Grant. Surely they will listen to reason."

But the woodsman returned, "Talk to a nest of rattlers! Jim Lane's
the only man that can talk to them now. We've got to stand them
off as long as we can." As he spoke he raised his revolver, and
was about to fire a shot through the door, when a slight noise at
one side of the room attracted his attention. He turned just in
time to catch a glimpse of a face as it was withdrawn from one of
the little windows. The noise at the door ceased suddenly, and
they heard the two men running to join the group under the tree.

"They've found you ain't alone," whispered the big fellow, springing
to the window again. And, as a wild drunken yell came from the
visitors, he added, "Seems like they're some excited about it, too.
They're holdin' a regular pow-wow. What do you reckon they're
thinkin'? Hope they'll keep it up 'till Jim--Sh--h--h Here comes
another. It's that ornery Jim Bowles from the mouth of Indian Creek."

The man approached the cabin, but stopped some distance away and
called, "Hello, ol' man!"

"Well, what do you want?" answered Mr. Howitt.

"Who's that there feller you got with you?"

"A friend."

"Yes! We all 'lowed hit war a friend, an' we all want t' see him
powerful bad. Can't he come out an' play with us, Mister?" Another
laugh came from the group under the tree.

Young Matt whispered, "Keep him a talkin', Dad;" and Mr. Howitt
called, "He doesn't feel like playing to-night. Come back to-
morrow."

At this the spokesman dropped his bantering tone, "Look a here,
ol' man. We'uns ain't got no time t' be a foolin' here. We know
who that feller is, an' we're a goin' t' have him. He's been a
sneakin' 'round this here neighborhood long enough. As fer you,
Mister, we 'low your health'll be some better back where you come
from; an' we aim t' hep you leave this neck o' th' woods right
sudden. Open up, now, an' turn that there feller over t' us; an'
we'll let you off easy like. If you don't, we'll bust in th' door,
an' make you both dance t' th' same tune. There won't be ary thing
under you t' dance on, nuther."

The old shepherd was replying kindly, when his speech was
interrupted by a pistol shot, and a command from the leader, at
which the entire gang charged toward the cabin, firing as they
came, and making the little valley hideous with their drunken
oaths and yells.

From his window, Young Matt coolly emptied his revolver, but even
as the crowd faltered, there came from their leader another volley
of oaths. "Go on, go on," yelled Wash. "Their guns are empty, now.
Fetch 'em out 'fore they can load again." With an answering yell,
the others responded. Carrying a small log they made for the cabin
at full speed. One crashing blow--the door flew from its hinges,
and the opening was filled with the drunken, sweating, swearing
crew. The same instant, Young Matt dropped his useless revolver,
and, springing forward, met them on the threshold. The old
shepherd--who had not fired a shot--could scarcely believe his
eyes, as he saw the giant catch the nearest man by the shoulder
and waist, and, lifting him high above his head, fling him with
terrific force full into the faces of his bewildered companions.

Those who were not knocked down by the strange weapon scattered in
every direction, crouching low. For a moment the big fellow was
master of the situation, and, standing alone in the doorway, in
the full light of the moon, was easily recognized.

"Hell, boys! Hit's Young Matt hisself!" yelled the one who had
raised a laugh, by saying that Young Matt was sick and the
shepherd was wanted to doctor.

"Yes! It's me, Bill Simpson. I'm sure ailin' to-night. I need
somebody to go for a doctor powerful bad," returned the young
giant.

"We never knowed it war you," whined the other carefully
lengthening the distance between the big man on the doorstep and
himself.

"No, I reckon not. You all played to find an old man alone, and do
for him like you've done for others. A fine lot you are, ten to
one, and him not knowin' the woods."

While he was speaking, the men slowly retreated, to gather about
their big leader under the tree, two of them being assisted by
their companions, and one other limping painfully. Young Matt
raised his voice, "I know you, Wash Gibbs, and I know this here is
your dirty work. You've been a braggin' what you'd do when you met
up with me. I'm here now. Why don't you come up like a man? Come
out here into the light and let's you and me settle this thing
right now. You all--" CRACK! A jet of flame leaped out of the
shadow, and the speaker dropped like a log.

With a cry the shepherd ran to the side of his friend; but in a
moment the crowd had again reached the cabin, and the old man was
dragged from his fallen companion. With all his strength, Mr.
Howitt struggled with his captors, begging them to let him go to
the boy. But his hands were bound tightly behind his back, and
when he still plead with those who held him, Wash Gibbs struck him
full in the mouth, a blow that brought the blood.

They were leading the stunned and helpless old man away, when
someone, who was bending over Young Matt, exclaimed, "You missed
him, Wash! Jest raked him. He'll be up in a minute. An' hell 'll
be to pay in th' wilderness if he ain't tied. Better fix him
quick."

The big fellow already showed signs of returning consciousness,
and, by the time they had tied his arms, he was able to struggle
to his feet. For a moment he looked dizzily around, his eyes
turning from one evil, triumphant face to another, until they
rested upon the bleeding countenance of his old friend. The
shepherd's eyes smiled back a message of cheer, and the kind old
man tried to speak, when Wash Gibbs made another threatening
motion, with his clenched fist.

At this, a cry like the roar of a mad bull came from the young
giant. In his rage, he seemed suddenly endowed with almost
superhuman strength. Before a man of the startled company could do
more than gasp with astonishment, he had shaken himself free from
those who held him, and, breaking the rope with which he was
bound, as though it were twine, had leaped to the shepherd's side.

But it was useless. For a moment, no one moved. Then a crashing
blow, from the butt of a rifle in the hands of a man in the rear
of the two prisoners, sent Young Matt once more to the ground.
When he again regained consciousness, he was so securely bound,
that, even with his great strength, he was helpless.

Leading their captives to the old tree, the men withdrew for a
short consultation, and to refresh themselves with another drink.
When they had finished, Gibbs addressed the two friends; "We'uns
didn't aim to hurt you, Young Matt, but seein' how you're so thick
with this here feller, an' 'pear to know so much 'bout him, I
reckon we can't hep ourselves nohow." He turned to the shepherd;
"There's been too dad burned much funny work, at this ranch, since
you come, Mister, an' we'uns 'low we'll just give warnin' that we
don't want no more strangers snoopin' 'round this neighborhood,
an' we don't aim t' have 'em neither. We'uns 'low we can take care
o' ourselves, without ary hep from th' dad burned government."

The shepherd tried to speak, but Gibbs, with an oath, roared,
"Shut up, I tell you. Shut up. I've been a watchin', an' I know
what I know. Fix that there rope, boys, an we'll get through, an'
mosey 'long out o' here. Ain't no use to palaver, nohow."

A rope was thrown over a limb above their heads, and a man
approached the shepherd with the noose. Young Matt struggled
desperately. With an evil grin, Gibbs said, "Don't you worry,
sonny; you're a goin', too." And at his signal another rope was
fixed, and the noose placed over the young man's head. The men
took their places, awaiting the word from their leader.

The shepherd spoke softly to his companion, "Thank you, my boy."
The giant began another desperate struggle.

Wash Gibbs, raising his hand, opened his lips to give the signal.
But no word came. The brutal jaw dropped. The ruffian's eyes
fairly started from his head, while the men who held the ropes,
stood as if turned to stone, as a long wailing cry came from the
dark shadows under the bluff. There was a moment of death-like
silence. Then another awful, sobbing groan, rising into a blood
curdling scream, came from down the road, and, from the direction
of the ruined cabin, advanced a ghostly figure. Through the deep
shadows and the misty light, it seemed to float toward them,
moaning and sobbing as it came.

A shuddering gasp of horror burst from the frightened crew under
the tree. Then, at a louder wail from the approaching apparition,
they broke and ran. Like wild men they leaped for their horses,
and, flinging themselves into their saddles, fled in every
direction.

Young Matt and the shepherd sank upon the ground in helpless
amazement.

As the outlaws fled, the spectre paused. Then it started onward
toward the two men. Again it hesitated. For a moment it remained
motionless, then turned and vanished, just as Jim Lane came flying
out of the timber, into the bright light of the little clearing.


CHAPTER XVIII.

LEARNING TO BE A LADY.


The books sent for by Mr. Howitt came a few days after the
adventure at the ranch, and Sammy, with all the intensity of her
nature, plunged at once into the work mapped out for her by the
shepherd.

All through the long summer and autumn, the girl spent hours with
her teacher out on the hillside. Seated on some rocky bench, or
reclining on the grassy slope, she would recite the lessons he
gave her, or listen to him, as he read aloud from character
forming books, pausing now and then to slip in some comment to
make the teaching clear, or to answer her eager questions.

At other times, while they followed the sheep, leisurely, from one
feeding ground to another, he provoked her to talk of the things
they were reading, and, while he thus led her to think, he as
carefully guarded her speech and language.

At first they took the old familiar path of early intellectual
training, but, little by little, he taught her to find the way for
herself. Always as she advanced, he encouraged her to look for the
life that is more than meat, and always, while they read and
talked together, there was opened before them the great book
wherein God has written, in the language of mountain, and tree,
and sky, and flower, and brook, the things that make truly wise
those who pause to read.

From her mother, and from her own free life in the hills, Sammy
had a body beautiful with the grace and strength of perfect
physical womanhood. With this, she had inherited from many
generations of gentle-folk a mind and spirit susceptible of the
highest culture. Unspoiled by the hot-house, forcing process, that
so often leaves the intellectual powers jaded and weak, before
they have fully developed, and free from the atmosphere of
falsehood and surface culture, in which so many souls struggle for
their very existence, the girl took what her teacher had to offer
and made it her own. With a mental appetite uninjured by tit-bits
and dainties, she digested the strong food, and asked eagerly for
more.

Her progress was marvelous, and the old scholar often had cause to
wonder at the quickness with which his pupil's clear mind grasped
the truths he showed her. Often before he could finish speaking, a
bright nod, or word, showed that she had caught the purpose of his
speech, while that wide eager look, and the question that
followed, revealed her readiness to go on. It was as though many
of the things he sought to teach her slept already in her brain,
and needed only a touch to arouse them to vigorous life.

In time, the girl's very clothing, and even her manner of dressing
her hair, came to reveal the development and transformation of her
inner self; not that she dressed more expensively; she could not
do that; but in the selection of materials, and in the many subtle
touches that give distinction even to the plainest apparel, she
showed her awakening. To help her in this, there was Aunt Mollie
and a good ladies' magazine, which came to her regularly, through
the kindness of her teacher.

Sammy's father, too, came unconsciously under the shepherd's
influence. As his daughter grew, the man responded to the change
in her, as he always responded to her every thought and mood. He
talked often now of the old home in the south land, and sometimes
fell into the speech of other days, dropping, for a moment, the
rougher expressions of his associates. But all this was to Sammy
alone. To the world, there was no change in Jim, and he still went
on his long rides with Wash Gibbs. By fall, the place was fixed up
a bit; the fence was rebuilt, the yard trimmed, and another room
added to the cabin.

So the days slipped away over the wood fringed ridges. The soft
green of tree, and of bush, and grassy slope changed to brilliant
gold, and crimson, and russet brown, while the gray blue haze that
hangs always over the hollows took on a purple tone. Then in turn
this purple changed to a deeper, colder blue, when the leaves had
fallen, and the trees showed naked against the winter sky.

With the cold weather, the lessons were continued in the Lane
cabin on the southern slope of Dewey. All day, while the shepherd
was busy at the ranch, Sammy pored over her books; and every
evening the old scholar climbed the hill to direct the work of his
pupil, with long Jim sitting, silent and grim, by the fireside,
listening to the talk, and seeing who knows what visions of the
long ago in the dancing flame.

And so the winter passed, and the spring came again; came, with
its soft beauty of tender green; its wealth of blossoms, and sweet
fragrance of growing things. Then came the summer; that terrible
summer, when all the promises of spring were broken; when no rain
fell for weary months, and the settlers, in the total failure of
their crops, faced certain ruin.


CHAPTER XIX.

THE DROUGHT.


It began to be serious by the time corn was waist high. When the
growing grain lost its rich color and the long blades rustled
dryly in the hot air, the settlers looked anxiously for signs of
coming rain. The one topic of conversation at the mill was the
condition of the crops. The stories were all of past drought or
tales of hardship and want.

The moon changed and still the same hot dry sky, with only now and
then a shred of cloud floating lazily across the blue. The grass
in the glades grew parched and harsh; the trees rattled their
shriveled leaves; creek beds lay glaring white and dusty in the
sun; and all the wild things in the woods sought the distant river
bottom. In the Mutton Hollow neighborhood, only the spring below
the Matthews place held water; and all day the stock on the range,
crowding around the little pool, tramped out the narrow fringe of
green grass about its edge, and churned its bright life into mud
in their struggle.

Fall came and there was no relief. Crops were a total failure.
Many people were without means to buy food for themselves and their
stock for the coming winter and the months until another crop
could be grown and harvested. Family after family loaded their few
household goods into the big covered wagons, and, deserting their
homes, set out to seek relief in more fortunate or more wealthy
portions of the country.

The day came at last when Sammy found the shepherd in the little
grove, near the deer lick, and told him that she and her father
were going to move.

"Father says there is nothing else to do. Even if we could squeeze
through the winter, we couldn't hold out until he could make
another crop."

Throwing herself on the ground, she picked a big yellow daisy from
a cluster, that, finding a little moisture oozing from a dirt-
filled crevice of the rock, had managed to live, and began pulling
it to pieces.

In silence the old man watched her. He had not before realized how
much the companionship of this girl was to him. To the refined and
cultivated scholar, whose lot had been cast so strangely with the
rude people of the mountain wilderness, the companionship of such
a spirit and mind was a necessity. Unconsciously Sammy had
supplied the one thing lacking, and by her demands upon his
thought had kept the shepherd from mental stagnation and morbid
brooding. Day after day she had grown into his life--his
intellectual and spiritual child, and though she had dropped the
rude speech of the native, she persisted still in calling him by
his backwoods title, "Dad." But the little word had come to hold a
new meaning for them both. He saw now, all at once, what he would
lose when she went away.

One by one, the petals from the big daisy fell from the girl's
hand, dull splashes of gold against her dress and on the grass.

"Where will you go?" he asked at last.

Sammy shook her head without looking up; "Don't know; anywhere
that Daddy can earn a livin'--I mean living--for us."

"And when do you start?"

"Pretty soon now; there ain't nothin'--there is nothing to stay
for now. Father told me when he went away day before yesterday
that we would go as soon as he returned. He promised to be home
sometime this evening. I--I couldn't tell you before, Dad, but I
guess you knew."

The shepherd did know. For weeks they had both avoided the
subject.

Sammy continued; "I--I've just been over to the Matthews place.
Uncle Matt has been gone three days now. I guess you know about
that, too. Aunt Mollie told me all about it. Oh, I wish, I wish I
could help them." She reached for another daisy and two big tears
rolled from under the long lashes to fall with the golden petals.
"We'll come back in the spring when it's time to plant again, but
what if you're not here?"

Her teacher could not answer for a time; then he said, in an odd,
hesitating way, "Have you heard from Ollie lately?"

The girl raised her head, her quick, rare instinct divining his
unspoken thought, and something she saw in her old friend's face
brought just a hint of a smile to her own tearful eyes. She knew
him so well. "You don't mean that, Dad," she said. "We just
couldn't do that. I had a letter from him yesterday offering us
money, but you know we could not accept it from him." And there
the subject was dropped.

They spent the afternoon together, and in the evening, at Sammy's
Lookout on the shoulder of Dewey, she bade him good-night, and
left him alone with his flocks in the soft twilight.

That same evening Mr. Matthews returned from his trip to the
settlement.


CHAPTER XX.

THE SHEPHERD WRITES A LETTER.


To purchase the sheep and the ranch in the Hollow, Mr. Matthews
placed a heavy mortgage not only upon the ranch land but upon the
homestead as well. In the loss of his stock the woodsman would
lose all he had won in years of toil from the mountain wilderness.

When the total failure of the crops became a certainty, and it was
clear that the country could not produce enough feed to carry his
flock through the winter until the spring grass, Mr. Matthews went
to the settlement hoping to get help from the bank there, where he
was known.

He found the little town in confusion and the doors of the bank
closed. The night before a band of men had entered the building,
and, forcing the safe, had escaped to the mountains with their
booty.

Old Matt's interview with the bank official was brief. "It is
simply impossible, Mr. Matthews," said the man; "as it is, we
shall do well to keep our own heads above water."

Then the mountaineer had come the long way home. As he rode slowly
up the last hill, the giant form stooped with a weariness unusual,
and the rugged face looked so worn and hopelessly sad, that Aunt
Mollie, who was waiting at the gate, did not need words to tell
her of his failure. The old man got stiffly down from his horse,
and when he had removed saddle and bridle, and had turned the
animal into the lot, the two walked toward the house. But they did
not enter the building. Without a word they turned aside from the
steps and followed the little path to the graves in the rude
enclosure beneath the pines, where the sunshine fell only in
patches here and there.

That night after supper Mr. Matthews went down into the Hollow to
see the shepherd. "It's goin' to be mighty hard on Mollie and me a
leavin' the old place up yonder," said the big man, when he had
told of his unsuccessful trip. "It won't matter so much to the
boy, 'cause he's young yet, but we've worked hard, Mr. Howitt, for
that home--Mollie and me has. She's up there now a sittin' on the
porch and a livin' it all over again, like she does when there
ain't no one around, with her face turned toward them pines west
of the house. It's mighty nigh a breakin' her heart just to think
of leavin', but she'll hide it all from me when I go up there,
thinkin' not to worry me--as if I didn't know. An' it's goin to be
mighty hard to part with you, too, Mr. Howitt. I don't reckon
you'll ever know, sir, how much you done for us; for me most of
all."

The shepherd made as if to interrupt, but the big man continued;
"Don't you suppose we can see, sir, how you've made over the whole
neighborhood. There ain't a family for ten miles that don't come
to you when they're in trouble. An' there's Sammy Lane a readin',
an' talkin' just about the same as you do yourself, fit to hold up
her end with anybody what's got education, and Jim himself's
changed something wonderful. Same old Jim in lots of ways, but
something more, somehow, though I can't tell it. Then there's my
boy, Grant. I know right well what he'd been if it wasn't for you
to show him what the best kind of a man's like. He'd a sure never
knowed it from me. I don't mean as he'd a ever been a bad man like
Wash Gibbs, or a no account triflin' one, like them Thompsons, but
he couldn't never a been what he is now, through and through, if
he hadn't a known you. There's a heap more, too, all over the
country that you've talked to a Sunday, when the parson wasn't
here. As for me, you--you sure been a God's blessin' to me and
Mollie, Mr. Howitt."

Again the shepherd moved uneasily, as if to protest, but his big
friend made a gesture of silence; "Let me say it while I got a
chance, Dad." And the other bowed his head while Old Matt
continued; "I can't tell how it is, an' I don't reckon you'd
understand any way, but stayin' as you have after our talk that
first night you come, an' livin' down here on this spot alone,
after what you know, it's--it's just like I was a little kid, an'
you was a standin' big and strong like between me an' a great
blackness that was somethin' awful. I reckon it looks foolish, me
a talkin' this way. Maybe it's because I'm gettin' old, but anyhow
I wanted you to know."

The shepherd raised his head and his face was aglow with a glad
triumphant light, while his deep voice was full of meaning as he
said gently, "It has been more to me, too, than you think, Mr.
Matthews. I ought to tell you--I--I will tell you--" he checked
himself and added, "some day." Then he changed the topic quickly.

"Are you sure there is no one who can help you over this hard
time? Is there NO way?"

The mountaineer shook his head. "I've gone over it all again an'
again. Williams at the bank is the only man I know who had the
money, an' he's done for now by this robbery. You see I can't go
to strangers, Dad; I ain't got nothin' left for security."

"But, could you not sell the sheep for enough to save the
homestead?"

"Who could buy? or who would buy, if they could, in this country,
without a bit of feed? And then look at 'em, they're so poor an'
weak, now, they couldn't stand the drivin' to the shippin' place.
They'd die all along the road. They're just skin an' bones, Dad;
ain't no butcher would pay freight on 'em, even."

Mr. Howitt sat with knitted brow, staring into the shadows. Then
he said slowly, "There is that old mine. If this man Dewey were
only here, do you suppose--?"

Again the mountaineer shook his head. "Colonel Dewey would be a
mighty old man now, Dad, even if he were livin.' 'Tain't likely
he'll ever come back, nor tain't likely the mine will ever be
found without him. I studied all that out on the way home."

As he finished speaking, he rose to go, and the dog, springing up,
dashed out of the cabin and across the clearing toward the bluff
by the corral, barking furiously.

The two men looked at each other. "A rabbit," said Mr. Howitt. But
they both knew that the well trained shepherd dog never tracked a
rabbit, and Old Matt's face was white when he mounted to ride away
up the trail.

Long the shepherd stood in the doorway looking out into the night,
listening to the voices of the wilderness. In his life in the
hills he had found a little brightness, while in the old
mountaineer's words that evening, he had glimpsed a future
happiness, of which he had scarcely dared to dream. With the
single exception of that one wild night, his life had been an
unbroken calm. Now he was to leave it all. And for what?

He seemed to hear the rush and roar of the world beyond the
ridges, as one in a quiet harbor hears outside the thunder of the
stormy sea. He shuddered. The gloom and mystery of it all crept
into his heart. He was so alone. But it was not the wilderness
that made him shudder. It was the thought of the great, mad, cruel
world that raged beyond the hills; that, and something else.

The dog growled again and faced threateningly toward the cliff.
"What is it, Brave?" The only answer was an uneasy whine as the
animal crouched close to the man's feet. The shepherd peered into
the darkness in the direction of the ruined cabin. "God," he
whispered, "how can I leave this place?"

He turned back into the house, closed and barred the door. With
the manner of one making a resolution after a hard struggle, he
took writing material from the top shelf of the cupboard, and,
seating himself at the table, began to write. The hours slipped
by, and page after page, closely written, came from the shepherd's
pen, while, as he wrote, the man's face grew worn and haggard. It
was as though he lifted again the burden he had learned to lay
aside. At last it was finished. Placing the sheets in an envelope,
he wrote the address with trembling hand.

While Mr. Howitt was writing his letter at the ranch, and Old Matt
was tossing sleeplessly on his bed in the big log house, a
horseman rode slowly down from the Compton Ridge road. Stopping at
the creek to water, he pushed on up the mountain toward the Lane
cabin. The horse walked with low hung head and lagging feet; the
man slouched half asleep in the saddle. It was Jim Lane.


CHAPTER XXI.

GOD'S GOLD.


The troubled night passed. The shepherd arose to see the sky above
the eastern rim of the Hollow glowing with the first soft light of
a new day. Away over Compton Ridge one last, pale star hung,
caught in the upper branches of a dead pine. Not a leaf of the
forest stirred. In awe the man watched the miracle of the morning,
as the glowing colors touched cloud after cloud, until the whole
sky was aflame, and the star was gone.

Again he seemed to hear, faint and far away, the roar and surge of
the troubled sea. With face uplifted, he cried aloud, "O God, my
Father, I ask thee not for the things that men deem great. I covet
not wealth, nor honor, nor ease; only peace; only that I may live
free from those who do not understand; only that I may in some
measure make atonement; that I may win pardon. Oh, drive me not
from this haven into the world again!"

"AGAIN, AGAIN," came back from the cliff on the other side of the
clearing, and, as the echo died away in the silent woods, a bush
on top of the bluff stirred in the breathless air; stirred, and
was still again. Somewhere up on Dewey a crow croaked hoarsely to
his mate; a cow on the range bawled loudly and the sheep in the
corral chorused in answer.

Re-entering the cabin, the old man quickly built a fire, then,
taking the bucket, went to the spring for water. He must prepare
his breakfast. Coming back with the brimming pail, he placed it on
the bench and was turning to the cupboard, when he noticed on the
table a small oblong package. "Mr. Matthews must have left it last
night," he thought. "Strange that I did not see it before."

Picking up the package he found that it was quite heavy, and, to
his amazement, saw that it was addressed to himself, in a strange,
cramped printing, such letters as a child would make. He ripped
open the covering and read in the same crude writing: "This stuff
is for you to give to the Matthews's and Jim Lane, but don't tell
anyone where you got it. And don't try to find out where it come
from either, or you'll wish you hadn't. You needn't be afraid.
It's good money alright." The package contained gold pieces of
various denominations.

With a low exclamation, the shepherd let the parcel slip, and the
money fell in a shining heap on the floor. He stood as in a dream,
looking from the gold to the letter in his hand. Then, going to
the door, he gazed long and searchingly in every direction.
Nothing unusual met his eye. Turning back into the cabin again, he
caught up the letter he had written, and stepped to the fireplace,
an expression of relief upon his face. But with his hand
outstretched toward the flames, he paused, the letter still in his
grasp, while the expression of relief gave way to a look of fear.

"The bank," he muttered; "the robbery." The shining pieces on the
floor seemed to glisten mockingly; "No, no, no," said the man.
"Better the other way, and yet--" He read the letter again. "It's
good money, alright; you needn't be afraid."

In his quandary, he heard a step without and looking up saw Pete
in the open door.

The boy's sensitive face was aglow, as he said; "Pete's glad this
morning; Pete saw the sky. Did Dad see the sky?"

Mr. Howitt nodded; then, moved by a sudden impulse, pointed to the
money, and said, "Does Pete see this? It's gold, all gold."

The boy drew near with curious eyes. "Dad doesn't know where it
came from," continued the shepherd. "Does Pete know?"

The youth gave a low laugh of delight; "Course Pete knows. Pete
went up on Dewey this morning; 'way up to the old signal tree, and
course he took me with him. The sky was all soft and silvery, an'
the clouds was full, plumb full of gold, like that there." He
pointed to the yellow coins on the floor. "Didn't Dad see? Some of
it must o' spilled out."

"Ah, yes, that was God's gold," said the older man softly.

The lad touched his friend on the arm, and with the other hand
again pointed to the glittering heap on the floor. "Pete says that
there's God's gold too, and Pete he knows."

The man started and looked at the boy in wonder; "But why, why
should it come to me at such a time as this?" he muttered.

"'Cause you're the Shepherd of Mutton Hollow, Pete says. Don't be
scared, Dad. Pete knows. It's sure God's gold."

The shepherd turned to the fireplace and dropped the letter he had
written upon the leaping flames.


CHAPTER XXII.

A LETTER FROM OLLIE STEWART.


The Postoffice at the Forks occupied a commanding position in the
northeast corner of Uncle Ike's cabin, covering an area not less
than four feet square.

The fittings were in excellent taste, and the equipment fully
adequate to the needs of the service: an old table, on legs
somewhat rickety; upon the table, a rude box, set on end and
divided roughly into eight pigeon holes, duly numbered; in the
table, a drawer, filled a little with stamps and stationery,
filled mostly with scraps of leaf tobacco, and an odd company of
veteran cob pipes, now on the retired list, or home on furlough;
before the table, a little old chair, wrought in some fearful and
wonderful fashion from hickory sticks from which the bark had not
been removed.

With every change of the weather, this chair, through some unknown
but powerful influence, changed its shape, thus becoming in its
own way a sort of government weather bureau. And if in all this
"land of the free and home of the brave" there be a single throne,
it must be this same curiously changeable chair. In spite of, or
perhaps because of, its strange powers, that weird piece of
furniture managed to make itself so felt that it was religiously
avoided by every native who called at the Forks. Not the wildest
"Hill-Billy" of them all dared to occupy for a moment this seat of
Uncle Sam's representative. Here Uncle Ike reigned supreme over
his four feet square of government property. And you may be very
sure that the mighty mysterious thing known as the "gov'ment" lost
none of its might, and nothing of its mystery, at the hands of its
worthy official.

Uncle Ike left the group in front of the cabin, and, hurriedly
entering the office, seated himself upon his throne. A tall, thin,
slow moving mule, brought to before a certain tree with the grace
and dignity of an ocean liner coming into her slip. Zeke Wheeler
dismounted, and, with the saddle mail pouch over his arm, stalked
solemnly across the yard and into the house, his spurs clinking on
the gravel and rattling over the floor. Following the mail
carrier, the group of mountaineers entered, and, with Uncle Ike's
entire family, took their places at a respectful distance from the
holy place of mystery and might, in the north east corner of the
room.

The postmaster, with a key attached by a small chain to one corner of
the table, unlocked the flat pouch and drew forth the contents--five
papers, three letters and one postal card.

The empty pouch was kicked contemptuously beneath the table. The
papers were tossed to one side. All eyes were fixed on the little
bundle of first class matter. In a breathless silence the official
cut the string. The silence was broken. "Ba thundas! Mary Liz
Jolly'll sure be glad t' git that there letter. Her man's been
gone nigh onto three months now, an' ain't wrote but once. That
was when he was in Mayville. I see he's down in th' nation now at
Auburn, sendin' Mary Liz some money, I reckon. Ba thundas, it's
'bout time! What!"

"James Creelman, E-S-Q., Wal, dad burn ME. Jim done wrote t' that
there house in Chicago more'n three weeks ago, 'bout a watch
they're a sellin' fer fo' dollars. Ba thundas! They'd sure answer
ME quicker'n that, er they'd hear turkey. What! I done tole Jim it
was only a blamed ol' fo' dollar house anyhow."

At this many nods and glances were exchanged by the group in
silent admiration of the "gov'ment," and one mountaineer, bold
even to recklessness, remarked, "Jim must have a heap o' money t'
be a buyin' four dollar watches. Must er sold that gray mule o'
hisn; hit'd fetch 'bout that much, I reckon."

"Much you know 'bout it, Buck Boswell. Let me tell you, Jim he
works, he does. He's the workingest man in this here county, ba
thundas! What! Jim he don't sit 'round like you fellers down on
th' creek an' wait fer pawpaws to git ripe, so he can git a square
meal, ba thundas!" The bold mountaineer wilted.

Uncle Ike proceeded with the business of his office. "Here's
Sallie Rhodes done writ her maw a card from th' Corners. Sallie's
been a visitin' her paw's folks. Says she'll be home on th' hack
next mail, an' wants her maw t' meet her here. You can take th'
hack next time, Zeke. An' ba thundas! Here's 'nother letter from
that dummed Ollie Stewart. Sammy ain't been over yet after th'
last one he wrote. Ba thundas! If it weren't for them blamed gov'-
ment inspectors, I'd sure put a spoke in his wheel. What! I'd
everlastin'ly seva' th' connections between that gentleman an'
these here Ozarks. Dad burn me, if I wouldn't. He'd better take
one o' them new fangled women in th' city, where he's gone to, an'
not come back here for one o' our girls. I don't believe Sammy'd
care much, nohow, ba thundas! What!" The official tossed the
letter into a pigeon hole beside its neglected mate, with a
gesture that fully expressed the opinion of the entire community,
regarding Mr. Stewart and his intentions toward Miss Lane.

Sammy got the letters the next day, and read them over and over,
as she rode slowly through the sweet smelling woods. The last one
told her that Ollie was coming home on a visit. "Thursday, that's
the day after to-morrow," she said aloud. Then she read the letter
again.

It was a very different letter from those Ollie had written when
first he left the woods. Most of all it was different in that
indefinable something by which a man reveals his place in life in
the letters he writes, no less than in the words he speaks, or the
clothing he wears. As Sammy rode slowly through the pinery and
down the narrow Fall Creek valley, she was thinking of these
things, thinking of these things seriously.

The girl had been in a way conscious of the gradual change in
Ollie's life, as it had been revealed in his letters, but she had
failed to connect the change with her lover. The world into which
young Stewart had gone, and by which he was being formed, was so
foreign to the only world known to Sammy, that, while she realized
in a dim way that he was undergoing a transformation, she still
saw him in her mind as the backwoods boy. With the announcement of
his return, and the thought that she would soon meet him face to
face, it burst upon her suddenly that her lover was a stranger.
The man who wrote this letter was not the man whom she had
promised to marry. Who was he?

Passing the mill and the blacksmith shop, the brown pony with his
absorbed rider began to climb the steep road to the Matthews
place. Half way up the hill, the little horse, stepping on a loose
stone, stumbled, catching himself quickly.

As a flash of lightning on a black night reveals well known
landmarks and familiar objects, this incident brought back to
Sammy the evening when, with Ollie and Young Matt, she had climbed
the same way; when her horse had stumbled and her face had come
close to the face of the big fellow whose hand was on the pony's
neck. The whole scene came before her with a vividness that was
startling; every word, every look, every gesture of the two young
men, her own thoughts and words, the objects along the road, the
very motion of her horse; she seemed to be actually living again
those moments of the past. But more than this, she seemed not only
to live again the incidents of that evening, but in some strange
way to possess the faculty of analyzing and passing judgment upon
her own thoughts and words.

Great changes had come to Sammy, too, since that night when her
lover had said good-by. And now, in her deeper life, the young
woman felt a curious sense of shame, as she saw how trivial were
the things that had influenced her to become Ollie's promised
wife. She blushed, as she recalled the motives that had sent her
to the shepherd with the request that he teach her to be a fine
lady.

Coming out on top of the ridge, Brownie stopped of his own accord,
and the girl saw again the figure of a young giant, standing in
the level rays of the setting sun, with his great arms
outstretched, saying, "I reckon I was built to live in these
hills. I don't guess you'd better count on me ever bein' more'n I
am." Sammy realized suddenly that the question was no longer
whether Ollie would be ashamed of her. It was quite a different
question, indeed.


CHAPTER XXIII.

OLLIE COMES HOME.


The day that Ollie was expected at the cabin on Dewey Bald, Mr.
Lane was busy in the field.

"I don't reckon you'll need me at th' house nohow," he said with a
queer laugh, as he rose from the dinner table; and Sammy,
blushing, told him to go on to his work, or Young Matt would get
his planting done first.

Jim went out to get his horse from the stable, but before he left,
he returned once more to the house.

"What is it, Daddy? Forget something?" asked Sammy, as her father
stood in the doorway.

"Not exactly," drawled Jim. "I ain't got a very good forgetter.
Wish I had. It's somethin' I can't forget. Wish I could."

In a moment the girl's arms were about his neck, "You dear foolish
old Daddy Jim. I have a bad forgetter, too. You thought when I
began studying with Dad Howitt that my books would make me forget
you. Well, have they?" A tightening of the long arm about her
waist was the only answer. "And now you are making yourself
miserable trying to think that Ollie Stewart and his friends will
make me forget you; just as if all the folks in the world could
ever be to me what you are; you, and Dad, and Uncle Matt, and Aunt
Mollie, and Young Matt. Daddy, I am ashamed of you. Honest, I am.
Do you think a real genuine lady could ever forget the father who
had been so good to her? Daddy, I am insulted. You must apologize
immediately."

She pretended to draw away, but the long arm held her fast, while
the mountaineer said in a voice that had in it pride and pain,
with a world of love, "I know, I know, girl. But you'll be a
livin' in the city, when you and Ollie are married, and these old
hills will be mighty lonesome with you gone. You see I couldn't
never leave the old place. 'Tain't much, I know, so far as money
value goes. But there's some things worth a heap more than their
money value, I reckon. If you was only goin' t' live where I could
ride over once or twice a week to see you, it would be different."

"Yes, Daddy; but maybe I won't go after all. I'm not married, yet,
you know."

Something in her voice or manner caused Jim to hold his daughter
at arm's length, and look full into the brown eyes; "What do you
mean, girl?"

Sammy laughed in an uneasy and embarrassed way. She was not sure
that she knew herself all that lay beneath the simple words. She
tried to explain. "Why, I mean that--that Ollie and I have both
grown up since we promised, and he has been living away out in the
big world and going to school besides. He must have seen many
girls since he left me. He is sure to be changed greatly, and--
and, maybe he won't want a backwoods wife."

The man growled something beneath his breath, and the girl placed
a hand over his lips; "You mustn't say swear words, Daddy Jim.
Indeed, you must not. Not in the presence of ladies, anyway."

"You're changed a heap in some ways, too," said Jim.

"Yes, I suppose I am; but my changes are mostly on the inside
like; and perhaps he won't see them."

"Would you care so mighty much, Sammy?" whispered the father.

"That's just it, Daddy. How can I tell? We must both begin all
over again, don't you see?" Then she sent him away to his work.

Sammy had finished washing the dinner dishes, and was putting
things in order about the house, when she stopped suddenly before
the little shelf that held her books. Then, with a smile, she
carried them every one into her own room, placing them carefully
where they could not be seen from the open door. Going next to the
mirror, she deliberately took down her hair, and arranged it in
the old careless way that Ollie had always known. "You're just the
same backwoods girl, Sammy Lane, so far as outside things go," she
said to the face in the glass; "but you are not quite the same all
the way through. We'll see if he--" She was interrupted by the
loud barking of the dog outside, and her heart beat more quickly
as a voice cried, "Hello, hello, I say; call off your dog!"

Sammy hurried to the door. A strange gentleman stood at the gate.
The strangest gentleman that Sammy had ever seen. Surely this
could not be Ollie Stewart; this slender, pale-faced man, with
faultless linen, well gloved hands and shining patent leathers.
The girl drew back in embarrassment.

But there was no hesitation on the part of the young man. Before
she could recover from her astonishment, he caught her in his arms
and kissed her again and again, until she struggled from his
embrace. "You--you must not," she gasped.

"Why not?" he demanded laughingly. "Has anyone a better right? I
have waited a long while for this, and I mean to make up now for
lost time."

He took a step toward her again, but Sammy held him off at arm's
length, as she repeated, "No--no--you must not; not now." Young
Stewart was helpless. And the discovery that she was stronger than
this man brought to the girl a strange feeling, as of shame.

"How strong you are," he said petulantly; ceasing his efforts.
Then carefully surveying the splendidly proportioned and developed
young woman, he added, "And how beautiful!"

Under his look, Sammy's face flushed painfully, even to her neck
and brow; and the man, seeing her confusion, laughed again. Then,
seating himself in the only rocking-chair in the room, the young
gentleman leisurely removed his gloves, looking around the while
with an amused expression on his face, while the girl stood
watching him. At last, he said impatiently, "Sit down, sit down,
Sammy. You look at me as if I were a ghost."

Unconsciously, she slipped into the speech of the old days, "You
sure don't look much like you used to. I never see nobody wear
such clothes as them. Not even Dad Howitt, when he first come. Do
you wear 'em every day?"

Ollie frowned; "You're just like all the rest, Sammy. Why don't
you talk as you write? You've improved a lot in your letters. If
you talk like that in the city; people will know in a minute that
you are from the country."

At this, Sammy rallied her scattered wits, and the wide,
questioning look was in her eyes, as she replied quietly, "Thank
you. I'll try to remember. But tell me, please, what harm could it
do, if people did know I came from the country?"

It was Ollie's turn to be amazed. "Why you can talk!" he said.
"Where did you learn?" And the girl answered simply that she had
picked it up from the old shepherd.

This little incident put Sammy more at ease, and she skilfully led
her companion to speak of the city and his life there. Of his
studies the young fellow had little to say, and, to her secret
delight, the girl found that she had actually made greater
progress with her books than had her lover with all his supposed
advantages.

But of other things, of the gaiety and excitement of the great
city, of his new home, the wealth of his uncle, and his own bright
prospects, Ollie spoke freely, never dreaming the girl had already
seen the life he painted in such glowing colors through the eyes
of one who had been careful to point out the froth and foam of it
all. Neither did the young man discover in the quiet questions she
asked that Sammy was seeking to know what in all this new world he
had found that he could make his own as the thing most worth
while.

The backwoods girl had never seen that type of man to whom the
life of the city, only, is life. Ollie was peculiarly fitted by
nature to absorb quickly those things of the world, into which he
had gone, that were most different from the world he had left; and
there remained scarcely a trace of his earlier wilderness
training.

But there is that in life that lies too deep for any mere change
of environment to touch. Sammy remembered a lesson the shepherd
had given her: gentle spirit may express itself in the rude words
of illiteracy; it is not therefore rude. Ruffianism may speak the
language of learning or religion; it is ruffianism still. Strength
may wear the garb of weakness, and still be strong; and a weakling
may carry the weapons of strength, but fight with a faint heart.
So, beneath all the changes that had come to her backwoods lover,
Sammy felt that Ollie himself was unchanged. It was as though he
had learned a new language, but still said the same things.

Sammy, too, had entered a new world. Step by step, as the young
man had advanced in his schooling, and, dropping the habits and
customs of the backwoods, had conformed in his outward life to his
new environment, the girl had advanced in her education under the
careful hand of the old shepherd. Ignorant still of the false
standards and the petty ambitions that are so large a part of the
complex world, into which he had gone, she had been introduced to
a world where the life itself is the only thing worth while. She
had seen nothing of the glittering tinsel of that cheap culture
that is death to all true refinement, But in the daily
companionship of her gentle teacher, she had lived in touch with
true aristocracy, the aristocracy of heart and spirit.

Young Matt and Jim had thought that, in Sammy's education, the
bond between the girl and her lover would be strengthened. They
had thought to see her growing farther and farther from the life
of the hills; the life to which they felt that they must always
belong. But that was because Young Matt and Jim did not know the
kind of education the girl was getting.

So Ollie had come back to his old home to measure things by his
new standard; and he had come back, too, to be measured according
to the old, old standard. If the man's eyes were dimmed by the
flash and sparkle that play upon the surface of life, the woman's
vision was strong and clear to look into the still depths.

Later in the day, as they walked together up the Old Trail to
Sammy's Lookout, the girl tried to show him some of the things
that had been revealed to her in the past months. But the young
fellow could not follow where she led, and answered her always
with some flippant remark, or with the superficial philosophy of
his kind.

When he tried to turn the talk to their future, she skillfully
defeated his purpose, or was silent; and when he would claim a
lover's privileges, she held him off. Upon his demanding a reason
for her coldness, she answered, "Don't you see that everything is
different now? We must learn to know each other over again."

"But you are my promised wife."

"I promised to be the wife of a backwoodsman," she answered. "I
cannot keep that promise, for that man is dead. You are a man of
the city, and I am scarcely acquainted with you."

Young Stewart found himself not a little puzzled by the situation.
He had come home expecting to meet a girl beautiful in face and
form, but with the mind of a child to wonder at the things he
would tell her. He had found, instead, a thoughtful young woman
trained to look for and recognize truth and beauty. Sammy was
always his physical superior. She was now his intellectual
superior as well. The change that had come to her was not a change
by environment of the things that lay upon the surface, but it was
a change in the deeper things of life--in the purpose and
understanding of life itself. Like many of his kind, Ollie could
not distinguish between these things.


CHAPTER XXIV.

WHAT MAKES A MAN.


Mr. Matthews and his son finished their planting early in the
afternoon and the boy set out to find old Kate and the mule colt.
Those rovers had not appeared at the home place for nearly two
weeks, and some one must bring them in before they forgot their
home completely.

"Don't mind if I ain't back for supper, Mother," said Young Matt.
"I may eat at the ranch with Dad. I ain't been down there for
quite a spell now, an' I'd kind o' like to know if that panther
we've been a hearin' is givin' Dad any trouble."

"Dad told me yesterday that he thought he heard old Kate's bell
over on yon side of Cox's Bald," said Mr. Matthews; "I believe if
I was you I'd take across Cox's, along the far side of th' ridge,
around Dewey an' down into the Hollow that way. Joe Gardner was
over north yesterday, an' he said he didn't see no signs on that
range. I reckon you'll find 'em on Dewey somewheres about Jim
Lane's, maybe. You'd better saddle a horse."

"No, I'll take it a foot. I can ride old Kate in, if I find them,"
replied the big fellow; and, with his rifle in the hollow of his
arm, he struck out over the hills. All along the eastern slope of
the ridge, that forms one side of Mutton Hollow, he searched for
the missing stock, but not a sound of the bell could he hear; not
a trace of the vagabonds could he find. And that was because old
Kate and the little colt were standing quietly in the shade in a
little glen below Sand Ridge not a quarter of a mile from the
barn.

The afternoon was well on when Young Matt gave up the search, and
shaped his course for the sheep ranch. He was on the farther side
of Dewey, and the sun told him that there was just time enough to
reach the cabin before supper.

Pushing straight up the side of the mountain, he found the narrow
bench, that runs like a great cornice two-thirds of the way around
the Bald Knob. The mountaineer knew that at that level, on the
side opposite from where he stood, was Sammy's Lookout, and from
there it was an easy road down to the sheep ranch in the valley.
Also, he knew that from that rocky shelf, all along the southern
side of the mountain, he would look down upon Sammy's home; and,
who could tell, he might even catch a glimpse of Sammy herself.
Very soon he rounded the turn of the hill, and saw far below the
Lane homestead; the cabin and the barn in the little clearing
looking like tiny doll houses.

Young Matt walked slowly now. The supper was forgotten. Coming to
the clump of cedars just above the Old Trail where it turns the
shoulder of the hill from the west, he stopped for a last look.
Beyond this point, he would turn his back upon the scene that
interested him so deeply.

The young man could not remember when he had not loved Sammy Lane.
She seemed to have been always a part of his life. It was the
season of the year when all the wild things of the forest choose
their mates, and as the big fellow stood there looking down upon
the home of the girl he loved, all the splendid passion of his
manhood called for her. It seemed to him that the whole world was
slipping away to leave him alone in a measureless universe. He
almost cried aloud. It is the same instinct that prompts the
panther to send his mating call ringing over the hills and through
the forest, and leads the moose to issue his loud challenge.

At last Young Matt turned to go, when he heard the sound of
voices. Someone was coming along the Old Trail that lay in full
view on the mountain side not two hundred yards away.
Instinctively the woodsman drew back into the thick foliage of the
cedars.

The voices grew louder. A moment more and Sammy with Ollie Stewart
appeared from around the turn of the hill. They were walking side
by side and talking earnestly. The young woman had just denied the
claims of her former lover, and was explaining the change in her
attitude toward him; but the big fellow on the ledge above could
not know that. He could not hear what they were saying. He only
saw his mate, and the man who had come to take her from him.

Half crouching on the rocky shelf in the dark shadow of the cedar,
the giant seemed a wild thing ready for his spring; ready and
eager, yet held in check by something more powerful still than his
passion. Slowly the two, following the Old Trail, passed from
sight, and Young Matt stood erect. He was trembling like a
frightened child. A moment longer he waited, then turned and
fairly ran from the place. Leaving the ledge at the Lookout, he
rushed down the mountain and through the woods as if mad, to burst
in upon the shepherd, with words that were half a cry, half a
groan. "He's come, Dad; he's come. I've just seen him with her."

Mr. Howitt sprang up with a startled exclamation. His face went
white. He grasped the table for support. He tried to speak, but
words would not come. He could only stare with frightened eyes, as
though Young Matt himself were some fearful apparition.

The big fellow threw himself into a chair, and presently the
shepherd managed to say in a hoarse whisper, "Tell me about it,
Grant, if you can."

"I seen them up on Dewey just now, goin' down the Old Trail from
Sammy's Lookout to her home. I was huntin' stock."

The old scholar leaned toward his friend, as he almost shouted,
"Saw them going to Sammy's home! Saw whom, lad? Whom did you see?"

"Why--why--Sammy Lane and that--that Ollie Stewart, of course. I
tell you he's come back. Come to take her away."

The reaction was almost as bad as the shock. Mr. Howitt gasped as
he dropped back into his seat. He felt a hysterical impulse to
laugh, to cry out. Young Matt continued; "He's come home, Dad,
with all his fine clothes and city airs, and now she'll go away
with him, and we won't never see her again."

As he began to put his thoughts into words, the giant got upon his
feet, and walked the floor like one insane. "He shan't have her,"
he cried, clenching his great fists; "he shan't have her. If he
was a man I could stand it, Dad. But look at him! Look at him,
will you? The little white-faced, washed out runt, what is he? He
ain't no man, Dad. He ain't even as much of a man as he was. And
Sammy is--God! What a woman she is! You've been a tellin' me that
I could be a gentleman, even if I always lived in the backwoods.
But you're wrong, Dad, plumb wrong. I ain't no gentleman. I can't
never be one. I'm just a man. I'm a--a savage, a damned beast, and
I'm glad of it." He threw back his shaggy head, and his white
teeth gleamed through his parted lips, as he spoke in tones of mad
defiance.

"Dad, you say there's some things bigger'n learnin', and such, and
I reckon this here's one of them. I don't care if that little
whelp goes to all the schools there is, and gets to be a president
or a king; I don't care if he's got all the money there is between
here and hell; put him out here in the woods, face to face with
life where them things don't count, and what is he? What is he,
Dad? He's nothin'! plumb nothin'!"

The old shepherd waited quietly for the storm to pass. The big
fellow would come to himself after a time; until then, words were
useless. At last Young Matt spoke in calmer tones; "I run away,
Dad. I had to. I was afraid I'd hurt him. Something inside o' me
just fought to get at him, and I couldn't a held out much longer.
I don't want to hurt nobody, Dad. I reckon it was a seein' 'em
together that did it. It's a God's blessin' I come away when I
did; it sure is." He dropped wearily into his chair again.

Then the teacher spoke, "It is always a God's blessing, lad, when
a man masters the worst of himself. You are a strong man, my boy.
You hardly know your strength. But you need always to remember
that the stronger the man, the easier it is for him to become a
beast. Your manhood depends upon this, and upon nothing else, that
you conquer and control the animal side of yourself. It will be a
sad moment for you, and for all of us who love you, if you ever
forget. Don't you see, lad, it is this victory only that gives you
the right to think of yourself as a man. Mind, I say to think of
yourself, as a man. It doesn't much matter what others think of
you. It is what one can honestly think of one's self that
matters."

So they spent the evening together, and the big mountaineer
learned to see still more deeply into the things that had come to
the older man in his years of study and painful experience.

When at last Young Matt arose to say good-night, the shepherd
tried to persuade him to sleep at the ranch. But he said, no, the
folks at home would be looking for him, and he must go. "I'm
mighty glad I come, Dad," he added; "I don't know what I'd do if
it wasn't for you; go plumb hog wild, and make a fool of myself, I
reckon. I don't know what a lot of us would do, either. Seems like
you're a sort of shepherd to the whole neighborhood. I reckon,
though, I'm 'bout the worst in the flock," he finished with a grim
smile.

Mr. Howitt took his hat from the nail. "If you must go, I will
walk a little way with you. I love to be out such nights as this.
I often wish Pete would take me with him."

"He's out somewhere to-night, sure," replied the other, as they
started. "We heard him a singin' last night." Then he stopped and
asked, "Where's your gun, Dad? There's a panther somewhere on this
range."

"I know," returned the shepherd; "I heard it scream last night;
and I meant to go up to the house to-day for a gun. I broke the
hammer of mine yesterday."

"That's bad," said Young Matt. "But come on, I'll leave mine with
you until to-morrow. That fellow would sure make things lively, if
he should come to see you, and catch you without a shootin' iron."

Together the two walked through the timber, until they came to
where the trail that leads to the Matthews place begins to climb
the low spur of the hill back of the house. Here Mr. Howitt
stopped to say good-night, adding, as the young man gave him the
rifle, "I don't like to take this, Grant. What if you should meet
that panther between here and home?"

"Shucks!" returned the other; "you're the one that'll need it.
You've got to take care of them sheep. I'll get home alright."

"Don't forget the other beast, lad. Remember what it is that makes
the man."


CHAPTER XXV.

YOUNG MATT REMEMBERS.


After parting with his friend, Young Matt continued on his way
until he reached the open ground below the point where the path
from the ranch joins the Old Trail. Then he stopped and looked
around.

Before him was the belt of timber, and beyond, the dark mass of
the mountain ridge with the low gap where his home nestled among
the trees. He could see the light from the cabin window shining
like a star. Behind him lay the darker forest of the Hollow, and
beyond, like a great sentinel, was the round, treeless form of
Dewey Bald. From where he stood, he could even see clearly against
the sky the profile of the mountain's shoulder, and the ledge at
Sammy's Lookout. Another moment, and the young man had left the
path that led to his home, and was making straight for the distant
hill. He would climb to that spot where he had stood in the
afternoon, and would look down once more upon the little cabin on
the mountain side. Then he would go home along the ridge.

Three quarters of an hour later, he pushed up out of a ravine that
he followed to its head below the Old Trail, near the place where,
with Pete and the shepherd, he had watched Sammy reading her
letter. He was climbing to the Lookout, for it was the easiest way
to the ledge, and, as his eye came on a level with the bench along
which the path runs, he saw clearly on the big rock above the
figure of a man. Instantly Young Matt stopped. The moon shone full
upon the spot, and he easily recognized the figure. It was Ollie
Stewart.

Young Stewart had been greatly puzzled by Sammy's attitude. It was
so unexpected, and, to his mind, so unreasonable. He loved the
girl as much as it was possible for one of his weak nature to
love; and he had felt sure of his place in her affections. But the
door that had once yielded so readily to his touch he had found
fast shut. He was on the outside, and he seemed somehow to have
lost the key. In this mood on his way home, he had reached the
spot that was so closely associated with the girl, and, pausing to
rest after the sharp climb, had fallen to brooding over his
disappointment. So intent was he upon his gloomy thoughts that he
had not heard Young Matt approaching, and was wholly unconscious
of that big fellow's presence in the vicinity.

For a time the face at the edge of the path regarded the figure on
the rock intently; then it dropped from sight. Young Matt slipped
quietly down into the ravine, and a few moments later climbed
again to the Old Trail at a point hidden from the Lookout. Here he
stepped quickly across the narrow open space and into the bushes
on the slope of the mountain above. Then with the skill of one
born and reared in the woods, the mountaineer made his way toward
the man on the shoulder of the hill.

What purpose lay under his strange movement Young Matt did not
know. But certainly it was not in his mind to harm Ollie. He was
acting upon the impulse of the moment; an impulse to get nearer
and to study unobserved the person of his rival. So he stalked him
with all the instinct of a creature of the woods. Not a twig
snapped, not a leaf rustled, as from bush to fallen log, from tree
trunk to rock, he crept, always in the black shadows, or behind
some object.

But there were still other eyes on Old Dewey that night, and sharp
ears heard the big woodsman climbing out of the ravine, if Ollie
did not. When the young man in the clear light of the moon crossed
the Old Trail, a figure near the clump of trees, where he had sat
with his two friends that day, dropped quietly behind a big rock,
half hidden in the bushes. As the giant crept toward the Lookout,
this figure followed, showing but little less skill than the
mountaineer himself. Once a loose stone rattled slightly, and the
big fellow turned his head; but the figure was lying behind a log
that the other had just left. When Young Matt finally reached the
position as close to Ollie as he could go without certain
discovery, the figure also came to a rest, not far away.

The moments passed very slowly now to the man crouching in the
shadows. Ollie looked at his watch. It was early yet to one
accustomed to late hours in the city. Young Matt heard distinctly
the snap of the case as the watch was closed and returned to its
owner's pocket. Then Stewart lighted a cigar, and flipped the
burned out match almost into his unseen companion's face.

It seemed to Young Matt that he had been there for hours. Years
ago he left his home yonder on the ridge, to look for stray stock.
They must have forgotten him long before this. The quiet cabin in
the Hollow, and his friend, the shepherd, too, were far away. In
all that lonely mountain there was no one--no one but that man on
the rock there; that man, and himself. How bright the moon was!

Suddenly another form appeared upon the scene. It came creeping
around the hill from beyond the Lookout. It was a long, low,
lithe-bodied, form that moved with the easy, gliding movements of
a big cat. Noiselessly the soft padded feet fell upon the hard
rock and loose gravel of the old pathway; the pathway along which
so many things had gone for their kill, or had gone to be killed.

Young Matt saw it the moment it appeared. He started in his place.
He recognized it instantly as the most feared of all the wild
things in the mountain wilderness--a panther. He saw it sniff the
footprints on the trail--Ollie's footprints. He saw it pause and
crouch as it caught sight of the man on the rock.

Instantly wild and unwelcome thoughts burned within the strong
man's brain. The woodsman knew why that thing had come. Against
such a foe the unconscious weakling on the rock there, calmly
puffing his cigar, would have no chance whatever. He would not
even know of its presence, until it had made its spring, and its
fangs were in his neck. The man of the wilderness knew just how it
would be done. It would be over in a minute.

The giant clenched his teeth. Why had he not gone on to his home
after leaving the shepherd? Why had he followed that impulse to
stand again where he had stood that afternoon? Above all, what had
possessed him--what had led him to creep to his present position?
He shot a quick glance around. How bright--how bright the moon
was!

The panther turned aside from the trail and with silent grace
leaped to the ledge, gaining a position on a level with Ollie--
still unconscious of its presence. A cold sweat broke out on the
big man's forehead. The great hands worked. His breath came in
quick gasps. It could not be laid to his door. He had only to
withdraw, to stop his ears and run, as he had fled that afternoon.
God! How slowly that thing crept forward, crouching low upon its
belly, its tail twitching from side to side, nearer, nearer. Young
Matt felt smothered. He loosened the collar of his shirt. The
moon--the moon was so bright! He could even see the muscles in the
beast's heavy neck and shoulders working under the sleek skin.

Suddenly the words of the shepherd came to him, as though shouted
in his ears, "Remember the other beast, lad. Don't you see it is
this victory only that gives you the right to think of yourself as
a man?"

Ollie was almost brushed from his place as the big mountaineer
sprang from the shadow, while the panther, startled by the
appearance of another man upon the rock, paused. An exclamation of
fright burst from young Stewart, as he took in the situation. And
the giant by his side reached forth a hand to push him back, as he
growled, "Shut up and get out of the way! This here's my fight!"

At the movement the wild beast seemed to understand that the
newcomer was there to rob him of his prey. With a snarl, it
crouched low again, gathering its muscles for the spring. The
giant waited. Suddenly the sharp crack of a rifle rang out on the
still night, echoing and echoing along the mountain.

The panther leaped, but fell short. The startled men on the rock
saw it threshing the ground in its death struggle.

"That was a lucky shot for you," said Ollie.

"Lucky for me," repeated Young Matt slowly, eyeing his well
dressed companion; "Well, yes, I reckon it was."

"Who fired it?"

The big fellow shook his head in a puzzled way.

Stewart looked surprised. "Wasn't it someone hunting with you?"

"With me? Huntin'? Not to-night;" muttered the other still
searching the hill side.

"Well, I'd like to know what you were doing here alone, then;"
said Ollie suspiciously.

At his tone, Young Matt turned upon him savagely, "'Tain't none
of your business, what I was a doin' here, that I can see. I
reckon these hills are free yet. But it's mighty lucky for us both
that someone was 'round, whoever he is. Maybe you ain't thankful
that that critter ain't fastened on your neck. But I am. An' I'm
goin' to find out who fired that shot if I can."

He started forward, but Ollie called imperiously, "Hold on there a
minute, I want to say something to you first." The other paused,
and young Stewart continued; "I don't know what you mean by
prowling around this time of night. But it looks as though you
were watching me. I warn you fairly, don't try it again. I know
how you feel toward Miss Lane, and I know how you have been with
her while I was away. I tell you it's got to stop. She is to be my
wife, and I shall protect her. You may just as well--"

He got no further. The big man sprang forward to face him with a
look that made the dandy shrink with fear. "Protect Sammy Lane
from me! Protect her, you! You know what I feel toward her? You!"
He fairly choked with his wild rage.

The frightened Ollie drew a weapon from his pocket, but, with a
snarling laugh, the big fellow reached out his great hand and the
shining toy went whirling through the air. "Go home," said the
giant. "Damn you, go home! Don't you hear? For God's sake get out
o' my sight 'fore I forget again!"

Ollie went.


CHAPTER XXVI.

OLLIE'S DILEMMA.


As "Preachin' Bill" used to say, "Every hound has hits strong
pints, but some has more of 'em."

Young Stewart was not without graces pleasing to the girl whom he
hoped to make his wife. He seemed to know instinctively all those
little attentions in which women so delight, and he could talk,
too, very entertainingly of the things he had seen. To the simple
girl of the backwoods, he succeeded in making the life in the city
appear very wonderful, indeed. Neither was Sammy insensible to the
influence of his position, and his prospective wealth, with the
advantages that these things offered. Then, with all this, he
loved her dearly; and when, if you please, was ever a woman wholly
unmoved by the knowledge that she held first place in a man's
heart?

For two weeks they were together nearly every day, sometimes
spending the afternoon at the girl's home on the side of Dewey, or
roving over the nearby hills; sometimes going for long rides
through the great woods to pass the day with friends, returning in
the evening to find Jim smoking in the doorway of the darkened
cabin.

When Mr. Lane, at the end of the first week, asked his daughter,
in his point blank fashion, what she was going to do with young
Stewart, the girl answered, "He must have his chance, Daddy. He
mast have a good fair chance. I--I don't know what it is, but
there is--I--I don't know, Daddy. I am sure I loved him when he
want away, that is, I think I am sure." And Jim, looking into her
eyes, agreed heartily; then he took down his violin to make joyful
music far into the night.

Ollie did not see Young Matt after their meeting on the Lookout.
The big fellow, too, avoided the couple, and Sammy, for some
reason, carefully planned their rides so that they would not be
likely to meet their neighbor an the ridge. Once, indeed, they
called at the Matthews place, walking over in the evening, but
that was when Sammy knew that Young Matt was not at home.

Day after day as they talked together, the girl tried honestly to
enter into the life of the man she had promised to marry. But
always there was that feeling of something lacking. Just what that
something was, or why she could not feel completely satisfied,
Sammy did not understand. But the day was soon to come when she
would know the real impulses of her heart.

Since that first afternoon, Ollie had not tried to force his suit.
While, in a hundred little ways, he had not failed to make her
feel his love, he had never openly attempted the role of lover. He
was conscious that to put the girl constantly upon the defensive
would be disastrous to his hopes; and in this, he was wise. But
the time had come when he must speak, for it was the last day of
his visit. He felt that he could not go back to the city without a
definite understanding.

Sammy, too, realized this, but still she was not ready to give an
answer to the question he would ask. They had been to the Forks,
and were on their way home. As they rode slowly under the trees,
the man pleaded his cause, but the woman could only shake her head
and answer quite truthfully, "Ollie, I don't know."

"But tell me, Sammy, is there any one in the way?"

Again she shook her head, "I--I think not."

"You think not! Don't you know?" The young man reined his horse
closer to the brown pony. "Let me help you decide, dear. You are
troubled because of the change you see in me, and because the life
that I have tried to tell you about is so strange, so different
from this. You need not fear. With me, you will very soon be at
home there; as much at home as you are here. Come, dear, let me
answer for you."

The girl lifted her face to his; "Oh, if you only could!" But,
even as she spoke, there came to her the memory of that ride home
from the party at Ford's, when her pony had crowded close to the
big white faced sorrel. It was Brownie this time who was pulled
sharply aside. The almost involuntary act brought a quick flush to
the young man's cheek, and he promptly reined his own horse to the
right, thus placing the full width of the road between them. So
they went down the hill into the valley, where Fall Creek tumbled
and laughed on its rocky way.

A thread of blue smoke, curling lazily up from the old stack, and
the sound of a hammer, told them that some one was at the mill.
Sammy was caught by a sudden impulse. "Why, that must be Young
Matt!" she exclaimed. "Let us stop. I do believe you haven't seen
him since you came home."

"I don't want to see him, nor any one else, now," returned Ollie.
"This is our last evening together, Sammy, and I want you all to
myself. Let us go up the old Roark trail, around Cox's Bald, and
home through the big, low gap." He checked his horse as he spoke,
for they had already passed the point where the Roark trail leaves
Fall Creek.

But the girl was determined to follow her impulse. "You can stop
just a minute," she urged. "You really ought to see Matt, you
know. We can ride back this way if you like. It's early yet."

But the man held his place, and replied shortly, "I tell you I
don't want to see anybody, and I am very sure that Young Matt
doesn't want to see me, not with you, anyway."

Sammy flushed at this, and answered with some warmth, "There is no
reason in the world why you should refuse to meet an old friend;
but you may do as you please, of course. Only I am going to the
mill." So saying, she started down the valley, and as there was
really nothing else for him to do, the man followed.

As they approached the mill, Sammy called for Young Matt, who
immediately left his work, and came to them. The big fellow wore
no coat, and his great arms were bare, while his old shirt,
patched and faded and patched again, was soiled by engine grease
and perspiration. His trousers, too, held in place by suspenders
repaired with belt lacing and fastened with a nail, were covered
with sawdust and dirt. His hands and arms and even his face were
treated liberally with the same mixture that stained his clothing;
and the shaggy red brown hair, uncovered, was sadly tumbled. In
his hand he held a wrench. The morrow was grinding day, and he had
been making some repairs about the engine.

Altogether, as the backwoodsman came forward, he presented a
marked contrast to the freshly clad, well groomed gentleman from
the city. And to the woman, the contrast was not without
advantages to the man in the good clothes. The thought flashed
through her mind that the men who would work for Ollie in the
shops would look like this. It was the same old advantage; the
advantage that the captain has over the private; the advantage of
rank, regardless of worth.

Sammy greeted Young Matt warmly. "I just told Ollie that it was
too bad he had not seen you. You were away the night we called at
your house, you know; and he is going home to-morrow."

The giant looked from one to the other. Evidently Sammy had not
heard of that meeting at the Lookout, and Stewart's face grew red
as he saw what was in the big fellow's mind. "I'm mighty glad to
see you again," he said lamely. "I told Sammy that I had seen you,
but she has forgotten."

"Oh, no, I haven't," replied the girl. "You said that you saw him
in the field as you passed the first day you came, but that you
were in such a hurry you didn't stop."

At this Ollie forced a loud laugh, and remarked that he was in
something of a hurry that day. He hoped that in the girl's
confusion the point might be overlooked.

But the mountaineer was not to be sidetracked so easily. Ollie's
poor attempt only showed more clearly that he had purposely
refrained from telling Sammy of the might when Young Matt had
interfered to save his life. To the simple straight-forward lad of
the woods, such a course revealed a spirit most contemptible.
Raising his soiled hands and looking straight at Ollie, he said,
deliberately, "I'm sorry, seein' as this is the first time we've
met, that I can't shake hands with you. This here's CLEAN dirt,
though."

Sammy was puzzled. Ollie's objection to their calling at the mill,
his evident embarrassment at the meeting, and something in Young
Matt's voice that hinted at a double meaning in his simple words,
all told her that there was something beneath the surface which
she did not understand.

After his one remark to her escort, the woodsman turned to the
girl, and, in spite of Sammy's persistent attempts to bring the
now sullen Ollie into the conversation, ignored the man
completely. When they had talked for a few moments, Young Matt
said, "I reckon you'll have to excuse me a minute, Sammy; I left
the engine in such a hurry when you called that I'll have to look
at it again. It won't take more'n a minute."

As he disappeared in the mill shed, the young lady turned to her
companion, "What's the matter with you two? Have you met and
quarreled since you came home?"

Fate was being very unkind to Ollie. He replied gruffly, "You'll
have to ask your friend. I told you how it would be. The greasy
hobo doesn't like to see me with you, and hasn't manners enough
even to hide his feelings. Come, let us go on."

A look that was really worth seeing came into the girl's fine
eyes, but she only said calmly; "Matt will be back in a minute."

"All the more reason why we should go. I should think you have had
enough. I am sure I have."

The young woman was determined now to know what lay at the bottom
of all this. She said quietly, but with a great deal of decision,
"You may go on home if you wish; I am going to wait here until
Young Matt comes back."

Ollie was angry now in good earnest. He had not told Sammy of the
incident at the Lookout because he felt that the story would bring
the backwoodsman into a light altogether too favorable. He thought
to have the girl safely won before he left the hills; then it
would not matter. That Young Matt would have really saved Ollie's
life at the risk of his own there was no doubt. And Stewart
realized that his silence under such circumstances would look
decidedly small and ungrateful to the girl. To have the story told
at this critical moment was altogether worse than if he had
generously told of the incident at once. He saw, too, that Sammy
guessed at some thing beneath the surface, and he felt uneasy in
remaining until Young Matt came back to renew the conversation.
And yet he feared to leave. At this stage of his dilemma, he was
relieved from his plight in a very unexpected manner.


CHAPTER XXVII.

THE CHAMPION.


A big wagon, with two men on the seat, appeared coming up the
valley road. It was Wash Gibbs and a crony from the river. They
had stopped at the distillery on their way, and were just enough
under the influence of drink to be funny and reckless.

When they caught sight of Ollie Stewart and Miss Lane, Wash said
something to his companion, at which both laughed uproariously.
Upon reaching the couple, the wagon came to a stop, and after
looking at Ollie for some moments, with the silent gravity of an
owl, Gibbs turned to the young lady, "Howdy, honey. Where did you
git that there? Did your paw give hit to you fer a doll baby?"

Young Stewart's face grew scarlet, but he said nothing.

"Can't hit talk?" continued Gibbs with mock interest.

Glancing at her frightened escort, the girl replied, "You drive
on, Wash Gibbs. You're in no condition to talk to anyone."

An ugly leer came over the brutal face of the giant; "Oh, I ain't,
ain't I? You think I'm drunk. But I ain't, not so mighty much.
Jest enough t' perten me up a pepper grain." Then, turning to his
companion, who was grinning in appreciation of the scene, he
continued, "Here, Bill; you hold th' ribbens, an' watch me tend t'
that little job I told you I laid out t' do first chance I got."
At this, Ollie grew as pale as death. Once he started as if to
escape, but he could not under Sammy's eyes.

As Wash was climbing down from the wagon, he caught sight of Young
Matt standing in the door of the mill shed. "Hello, Matt," he
called cheerfully; "I ain't a lookin' fer you t' day; 'tend t' you
some other time. Got more important business jest now."

Young Matt made no reply, nor did he move to interfere. In the
backwoods every man must fight his own battles, so long as he
fights with men. When Stewart was in danger from the panther, it
was different. This was man to man. Sammy, too, reared in the
mountains, and knowing the code, waited quietly to see what her
lover would do.

Coming to Ollie's side, Gibbs said, "Git down, young feller, an'
look at yer saddle."

"You go on, and let me alone, Wash Gibbs. I've never hurt you."
Ollie's naturally high pitched voice was shrill with fear.

Wash paused, looked back at his companion in the wagon; then to
Young Matt, and then to the girl on the horse. "That's right," he
said, shaking his head with ponderous gravity. "You all hear him.
He ain't never hurted me, nary a bit. Nary a bit, ladies an'
gentlemen. But, good Lord! look at him! Hain't hit awful!"
Suddenly he reached out one great arm, and jerked the young man
from his horse, catching him with the other hand as he fell, and
setting him on his feet in the middle of the road.

Ollie was like a child in the grasp of his huge tormentor, and, in
spite of her indignation, a look of admiration flashed over
Sammy's face at the exhibition of the bully's wonderful physical
strength; an admiration, that only heightened the feeling of shame
for her lover's weakness.

Gibbs addressed his victim, "Now, dolly, you an' me's goin' t'
play a little. Come on, let's see you dance." The other struggled
feebly a moment and attempted to draw a pistol, whereupon Wash
promptly captured the weapon, remarking in a sad tone as he did
so, "You hadn't ought t' tote such a gun as that, sonny; hit might
go off. Hit's a right pretty little thing, ain't hit?" he
continued, holding his victim with one hand, and examining the
pearl handled, nickel plated weapon with great interest. "Hit sure
is. But say, dolly, if you was ever t' shoot me with that there,
an' I found hit out, I'd sure be powerful mad. You hear me, now,
an' don't you pack that gun no more; not in these mountains. Hit
ain't safe."

The fellow in the wagon roared with delight at these witticisms,
and looked from Young Matt to Sammy to see if they also
appreciated the joke.

"Got any more pretties!" asked Gibbs of his victim. "No? Let's
see." Catching the young man by the waist, he lifted him bodily,
and, holding him head downward, shook him roughly. Again Sammy
felt her blood tingle at the feat of strength.

Next holding Ollie with one huge hand at the back of his neck,
Wash said, "See that feller in th' wagon there? He's a mighty fine
gentleman; friend o' mine. Make a bow t' him." As he finished,
with his free hand he struck the young man a sharp blow in the
stomach, with the result that Stewart did make a bow, very low,
but rather too suddenly to be graceful.

The fellow in the wagon jumped up and bowed again and again;
"Howdy, Mr. City Man; howdy. Mighty proud t' meet up with you;
mighty proud, you bet!"

The giant whirled his captive toward the mill. "See that feller
yonder? I'm goin' t' lick him some day. Make a face at him."
Catching Ollie by the nose and chin, he tried to force his
bidding, while the man in the wagon made the valley ring with his
laughter. Then Wash suddenly faced the helpless young man toward
Sammy. "Now ladies and gentlemen," he said in the tones of a
showman addressing an audience, "this here pretty little feller
from th' city's goin' t' show us Hill-Billies how t' spark a gal."

The bully's friend applauded loudly, roaring at the top of his
voice, "Marry 'em, Wash. Marry 'em. You can do hit as good as a
parson! You'd make a good parson. Let's see how'd you go at hit."

The notion tickled the fancy of the giant, for it offered a way to
make Sammy share the humiliation more fully. "Git down an' come
here t' yer honey," he said to the girl. "Git down, I say," he
repeated, when the young woman made no motion to obey.

"Indeed, I will not," replied Sammy shortly.

Her tone and manner angered Gibbs, and dropping Ollie he started
toward the girl to take her from the horse by force. As he reached
the pony's side, Sammy raised her whip and with all her strength
struck him full across the face. The big ruffian drew back with a
bellow of pain and anger. Then he started toward her again. "I'll
tame you, you wild cat," he yelled. And Sammy raised her whip
again.

But before Gibbs could touch the girl, a powerful hand caught him
by the shoulder. "I reckon you've had fun enough, Wash Gibbs,"
remarked Young Matt in his slow way. "I ain't interfering between
man and man, but you'd best keep your dirty hands off that lady."

The young woman's heart leaped at the sound of that deep calm
voice that carried such a suggestion of power. And she saw that
the blue eyes under the tumbled red brown locks were shining now
like points of polished steel. The strong man's soul was rejoicing
with the fierce joy of battle.

The big bully drew back a step, and glared at the man who had come
between him and his victim; the man whom, for every reason, he
hated. Lifting his huge paws, he said in a voice hoarse with
deadly menace, "Dirty, be they? By hell, I'll wash 'em. An' hit
won't be water that'll clean 'em, neither. Don't you know that no
man ever crosses my trail an' lives?"

The other returned easily, "Oh, shucks! Get into your wagon and
drive on. You ain't on Roark now. You're on Fall Creek, and over
here you ain't no bigger'n anybody else."

While Young Matt was speaking, Gibbs backed slowly away, and, as
the young man finished, suddenly drew the pistol he had taken from
Ollie. With a quickness and lightness astonishing in one of his
bulk and usually slow movements, the mountaineer leaped upon his
big enemy. There was a short, sharp struggle, and Wash staggered
backward, leaving the shining weapon in Young Matt's hand. "It
might go off, you know," said the young fellow quietly, as he
tossed the gun on the ground at Ollie's feet.

With a mad roar, Gibbs recovered himself and rushed at his
antagonist. It was a terrific struggle; not the skillful sparring
of trained fighters, but the rough and tumble battling of
primitive giants. It was the climax of long months of hatred; the
meeting of two who were by every instinct mortal enemies. Ollie
shrank back in terror, but Sammy leaned forward in the saddle, her
beautiful figure tense, her lips parted, and her face flushed with
excitement.

It was soon evident that the big champion of the hills had at last
met his match. As he realized this, a look of devilish cunning
crept into the animal face of Gibbs, and he maneuvered carefully
to bring his enemy's back toward the wagon.

Catching a look from his friend, over Young Matt's shoulder, the
man in the wagon slipped quickly to the ground, and Sammy saw with
horror a naked knife in his hand. She glanced toward Ollie
appealingly, but that gentleman was helpless. The man with the
knife began creeping cautiously toward the fighting men, keeping
always behind Young Matt. The young woman felt as though an iron
band held her fast. She could not move. She could not speak. Then
Gibbs went down, and the girl's scream rang out, "Behind you,
Matt! Look quick!"

As he recovered his balance from the effort that had thrown Wash,
Young Matt heard her cry, saw the girl's look of horror, and her
outstretched hand pointing. Like a flash he whirled just as the
knife was lifted high for the murderous blow. It was over in an
instant. Sammy saw him catch the wrist of the uplifted arm, heard
a dull snap and a groan, saw the knife fall from the helpless
hand, and then saw the man lifted bodily and thrown clear over the
wagon, to fall helpless on the rocky ground. The woman gave a low
cry, "Oh, WHAT A MAN!"

Wash Gibbs, too, opened his eyes, just in time to witness the
unheard-of feat, and to see the bare-armed young giant who
performed it turn again, breathing heavily with his great
exertion, but still ready to meet his big antagonist.

The defeated bully rose from the ground. The other stepped forward
to meet him. But without a word, Gibbs climbed into the wagon and
took up the reins. Before they could move, Young Matt had the
mules by their heads. "You have forgotten something," he said
quietly, pointing to the man on the ground, who was still
unconscious from his terrible fall. "That there's your property.
Take it along. We ain't got no use for such as that on Fall
Creek."

Sullenly Wash climbed down and lifted his companion into the
wagon. As Young Matt stood aside to let him go, the bully said,
"I'll see you agin fer this."

The strong man only answered, "I reckon you'd better stay on
Roark, Wash Gibbs. You got more room there."


CHAPTER XXVIII.

WHAT PETE TOLD SAMMY.


No word was spoken by either Sammy or her lover, while their
horses were climbing the mill road, and both were glad when they
reached the top of the ridge, and turned into the narrow path
where they would need to ride one before the other. It was not
easy to ride side by side, when each was busy with thoughts not to
be spoken.

At the gate, Ollie dismounted to help the girl from her horse. But
before he could reach the pony's side, Sammy sprang lightly to the
ground, unassisted. Opening the big gate, she turned Brownie loose
in the yard, while the man stood watching her, a baffled look upon
his face. He had always done these little things for her. To be
refused at this time was not pleasant. The feeling that he was on
the outside grew stronger.

Turning to his own horse, Ollie placed his foot in the stirrup to
mount, when Sammy spoke,--perhaps she felt that she had been a
little unkind--"You were going to stay to supper," she said.

"Not to-night," he answered, gaining his seat in the saddle, and
picking up the reins.

"But you are going to leave in the morning, are you not? You--you
must not go like this."

He dropped the reins to the horse's neck again, "Look here, Sammy,
do you blame me because I did not fight that big bully?"

Sammy did not reply.

"What could I do? You know there is not another man in the
mountains beside Young Matt who could have done it. Surely you
cannot blame me."

The young woman moved uneasily, "No, certainly not. I do not blame
you in the least. I--but it was very fortunate that Young Matt was
there, wasn't it?" The last sentence slipped out before she knew.

Ollie retorted angrily, "It seems to be very fortunate for him. He
will be a greater hero than ever, now, I suppose. If he is wise,
he will stay in the backwoods to be worshipped for he'll find that
his size won't count for much in the world. He's a great man here,
where he can fight like a beast, but his style wouldn't go far
where brains are of value. It would be interesting to see him in
town; a man who never saw a railroad."

Sammy lifted her head quickly at this, and fixed her eyes on the
man's face with that wide, questioning gaze that reminded one so
of her father, "I never saw a railroad, either; not that I can
remember; though, I suppose we must have crossed one or two on our
way to Texas when I was a baby. Is it the railroads then that
makes one so--so superior?"

The man turned impatiently in the saddle, "You know what I mean."

"Yes," she answered slowly. "I think I do know what you mean."

Ollie lifted the reins again from his horse's neck, and angered
them nervously. "I'd better go now; there's no use talking about
this to-night. I won't leave in the morning, as I had planned. I--
I can't go like this." There was a little catch in his voice. "May
I come again to-morrow afternoon, Sammy?"

"Yes, you had better go now, and come back to-morrow."

"And Sammy, won't you try to think that I am not altogether
worthless, even if I am not big enough to fight Wash Gibbs? You
are sure that you do not blame me for what happened at the mill?"

"No," she said; "of course not. You could not help it. Why should
I blame anyone for that which he cannot help?"

Then Ollie rode away, and Sammy, going to her pony, stood petting
the little horse, while she watched her lover up the Old Trail,
and still there was that wide, questioning look in her eyes. As
Ollie passed from sight around the hill above, the girl slipped
out of the gate, and a few minutes later stood at the Lookout,
where she could watch her lover riding along the ridge. She saw
him pass from the open into the fringe of timber near the big gap;
and, a few minutes later, saw him reappear beyond the deer lick.
Still she watched as he moved along the rim of the Hollow, looking
in the distance like a toy man on a toy horse; watched until he
passed from sight into the timber again, and was gone. And all the
time that questioning look was in her eyes.

Did she blame Ollie that he had played so poorly his part in the
scene at the mill. No, she told herself over and over again, as
though repeating a lesson; no, Ollie was not to blame, and yet--

She knew that he had spoken truly when he said that there were
things that counted for more than brute strength. But was there
not something more than brute strength in the incident? Was there
not that which lay deeper? something of which the brute strength,
after all, was only an expression? The girl stamped her foot
impatiently, as she exclaimed aloud, "Oh, why did he not TRY to do
something? He should have forced Wash Gibbs to beat him into
insensibility rather than to have submitted so tamely to being
played with."

In the distance she saw the shepherd following his flock down the
mountain, and the old scholar, who always watched the Lookout,
when in the vicinity, for a glimpse of his pupil, waved his hand
in greeting as he moved slowly on after his charges. It was
growing late. Her father, too, would be coming home for his
supper. But as she rose to go, a step on the mountain side above
caught her attention, and, looking up, she saw Pete coming toward
the big rock. Sammy greeted the youth kindly, "I haven't seen Pete
for days and days; where has he been?"

"Pete's been everywhere; an' course I've been with him," replied
the lad with his wide, sweeping gesture. Then throwing himself at
full length at the girl's feet, he said, abruptly, "Pete was here
that night, and God, he was here, too. Couldn't nobody else but
God o' done it. The gun went bang, and a lot more guns went bang,
bang, all along the mountains. And the moonlight things that was a
dancin' quit 'cause they was scared; and that panther it just
doubled up and died. Matt and Ollie wasn't hurted nary a bit. Pete
says it was God done that; He was sure in the hills that night."

Sammy was startled. "Matt and Ollie, a panther? What do you mean,
boy?"

The troubled look shadowed the delicate face, as the lad shook his
head; "Don't mean nothin', Sammy, not me. Nobody can't mean
nothin', can they?"

"But what does Pete mean? Does Pete know about it?"

"Oh, yes, course Pete knows everything. Don't Sammy know 'bout
that night when God was in the hills?" He was eager now, with eyes
wide and face aglow.

"No," said Sammy, "I do not know. Will Pete tell me all about it?"

The strange youth seated himself on the rock, facing the valley
below, saying in a low tone, "Ollie was a settin' like this, all
still; just a smokin' and a watchin' the moonlight things that was
dancin' over the tops of the trees down there." Then leaping to
his feet the boy ran a short way along the ledge, to come stealing
back, crouching low, as he whispered, "It come a creepin' and a
creepin' towards Ollie, and he never knowed nothin' about it. But
Matt he knowed, and God he knowed too." Wonderingly, the girl
watched his movement. Suddenly he sprang to the rock again, and
facing the imaginary beast, cried in childish imitation of a man's
deep voice, "Get out of the way. This here's my fight." Then in
his own tones, "It was sure scared when Young Matt jumped on the
rock. Everything's scared of Matt when he talks like that. It was
mad, too, 'cause Matt he wouldn't let it get Ollie. And it got
ready to jump at Matt, and Matt he got ready for a tussle, and
Ollie he got out of the way. And all the moonlight things stopped
dancin', and the shadow things come out to see the fight." He had
lowered his voice again almost to a whisper. Sammy was breathless.
"Bang!" cried the lad, clapping his hands and shouting the words;
"Bang! Bang! God, he fired and all the guns in the hills went off,
and that panther it just doubled up and died. It would sure got
Ollie, though, if Matt hadn't a jumped on the rock when he did.
But do you reckon it could o' got Matt, if God hadn't been here
that night?"

It was all too clearly portrayed to be mistaken. "Sammy needn't be
afeared," continued Pete, seeing the look on the girl's face. "It
can't come back no more. It just naturally can't, you know, Sammy;
'cause God he killed it plumb dead. And Pete dragged it way over
on yon side of the ridge and the buzzards got it."


CHAPTER XXIX.

JIM LANE MAKES A PROMISE.


Sammy went home to find her father getting supper. Rushing into
the cabin, the girl gave him a hug that caused Jim to nearly drop
the coffee pot. "You poor abused Daddy, to come home from work,
all tired and find no supper, no girl, no nothing. Sit right down
there, now, and rest, while I finish things."

Jim obeyed with a grin of appreciation. "I didn't fix no taters;
thought you wasn't comin'."

"Going to starve yourself, were you? just because I was gone,"
replied the girl with a pan of potatoes in her hand. "I see right
now that I will have to take care of you always--always, Daddy
Jim."

The smile suddenly left the man's face. "Where's Ollie Stewart?
Didn't he come home with you?"

"Ollie's at home, I suppose. I have been up to the Lookout talking
to Pete."

"Ain't Ollie goin' back to the city to-morrow?"

"No, not to-morrow; the next day. He's coming over here to-morrow
afternoon. Then he's going away." Then, before Jim could ask
another question, she held up the half of a ham; "Daddy, Daddy!
How many times have I told you that you must not--you must not
slice the ham with your pocket knife? Just look there! What would
Aunt Mollie say if she saw that, so haggled and one sided?"

All during the evening meal, the girl kept up a ceaseless merry
chatter, changing the subject abruptly every time it approached
the question that her father was most anxious to ask. And the man
delighted with her gay mood responded to it, as he answered to all
her moods, until they were like two school children in their fun.
But, when supper was over and the work done, and Jim, taking down
his violin, would have made music, Sammy promptly relieved him of
his instrument, and seated herself on his knee. "Not to-night,
Daddy. I want to talk to-night, real serious."

She told him then of the encounter with Wash Gibbs and his friend
at the mill, together with the story that Pete had illustrated so
vividly at the Lookout. "And so, Daddy," she finished; "I know now
what I shall do. He will come to-morrow afternoon to say good-by,
and then he will go away again back to the city and his fine
friends for good. And I'll stay and take care of my Daddy Jim. It
isn't that he is a bad man like Wash Gibbs. He couldn't be a bad
man like that; he isn't big enough. And that's just it. He is too
little--body, soul and spirit--he is too little. He will do well
in the world; perhaps he will even do big things. But I heard dear
old Preachin' Bill say once, that 'some fellers can do mighty big
things in a durned little way.' So he is going back to the city,
and I am going to stay in the hills."

Jim took no pains to hide his delight. "I knowed it, girl. I
knowed it. Bank on the old blood every time. There ain't a drop of
yeller in it; not a drop, Sammy. Ollie ain't to say bad, but he
ain't just our kind. Lord! But I'd like to o' seen Young Matt a
givin' it to Wash Gibbs!" He threw back his head and roared with
delight. "Just wait 'till I see Wash. I'll ask him if he thinks
Young Matt would need a pry for to lift that mill engine with,
now." Then all of a sudden the laugh died out, and the man's dark
face was serious, as he said, slowly, "The boy'll have to watch
him, though. It'll sure be war from this on; the worst kind of
war."

"Daddy, what do you think Wash would have done to me, if Young
Matt had not been there?"

That metallic ring was in Jim's voice, now, as he replied, "Wash
Gibbs ought to knowed better than to done that. But it was a
blessin' Young Matt was there, wasn't it? He'd take care of you
anywhere. I wouldn't never be afraid for you with him."

The girl hid her face on her father's shoulder, as she said,
"Daddy, will Wash Gibbs come here any more now? It seems to me he
wouldn't dare meet you after this."

Jim answered uneasily, "I don't know, girl. I reckon he'll be
around again after a time."

There was a pause for a little while; then Sammy, with her arms
still about his neck, said, "Daddy, I'm going to stay in the hills
with you now. I am going to send Ollie away to-morrow, because as
you say, he isn't our kind. Daddy, Wash Gibbs is not our kind
either, is he?"

"You don't understand, girl, and I can't tell you now. It all
started way back when you was a little trick."

The young woman answered very gently, "Yes, I know. You have told
me that often. But, Daddy, what will--what will our friends think,
if you keep on with Wash Gibbs now, after what happened at the
mill to-day? Young Matt fought Gibbs because he insulted me and
was going to hurt me. You say yourself that it will be war between
them now? Will you side with Wash? And if you do, won't it look
like there was just a little, tiny streak of yellow in us?"

This side of the situation had not struck Jim at first. He got up
and walked the floor, while the girl, standing quietly by the
fireplace, watched him, a proud, fond light in her eyes. Sammy did
not know what the bond between her father and the big ruffian was,
but she knew that it was not a light one. Now that the issue was
fairly defined, she felt confident that, whatever the cost, the
break would be made.

But at this time it was well that she did not know how great the
cost of breaking the bond between the two men would be.

Jim stopped before his daughter, and, placing a hand upon each
shoulder, said, "Tell me, girl; are you so powerful anxious to
have me and Young Matt stay good friends like we've always been?"

"I--I am afraid I am, Daddy."

And then, a rare smile came into the dark face of Jim Lane. He
kissed the girl and said, "I'll do it, honey. I ain't afraid to,
now."


CHAPTER XXX.

SAMMY GRADUATES.


The next day when young Stewart came, the books were all back on
the shelf in the main room of the cabin, and Sammy, dressed in a
fresh gown of simple goods and fashion, with her hair arranged
carefully, as she had worn it the last two months before Ollie's
coming, sat at the window reading.

The man was surprised and a little embarrassed. "Why, what have
you been doing to yourself?" he exclaimed.

"I have not been doing anything to myself. I have only done some
things to my clothes and hair," returned the girl.

Then he saw the books. "Why, where did these come from?" He crossed
the room to examine the volumes. "Do you--do you read all these?"

"The shepherd has been helping me," she explained.

"Oh, yes. I understood that you were studying with him." He looked
at her curiously, as though they were meeting for the first time.
Then, as she talked of her studies, his embarrassment deepened,
for he found himself foundering hopelessly before this clear-eyed,
clear-brained backwoods girl.

"Come," said Sammy at last. "Let us go for a walk." She led the
way to her favorite spot, high up on the shoulder of Dewey, and
there, with Mutton Hollow at their feet and the big hills about
them, with the long blue ridges in the distance beyond which lay
Ollie's world, she told him what he feared to learn. The man
refused to believe that he heard aright. "You do not understand,"
he protested, and he tried to tell her of the place in life that
would be hers as his wife. In his shallowness, he talked even of
jewels, and dresses, and such things.

"But can all this add one thing to life itself?" she asked. "Is
not life really independent of all these things? Do they not
indeed cover up the real life, and rob one of freedom? It seems to
me that it must be so."

He could only answer, "But you know nothing about it. How can you?
You have never been out of these woods."

"No," she returned, "that is true; I have never been out of these
woods, and you can never, now, get away from the world into which
you have gone." She pointed to the distant hills. "It is very,
very far over there to where you live. I might, indeed, find many
things in your world that would be delightful; but I fear that I
should lose the things that after all are, to me, the really big
things. I do not feel that the things that are greatest in your
life could bring happiness without that which I find here. And
there is something here that can bring happiness without what you
call the advantages of the world to which you belong."

"What do you know of the world?" he said roughly.

"Nothing," she said. "But I know a little of life. And I have
learned some things that I fear you have not. Beside, I know now
that I do not love you. I have been slow to find the truth, but I
have found it. And this is the one thing that matters, that I
found it in time."

"Did you reach this conclusion at the mill yesterday?" he asked
with a sneer.

"No. It came to me here on the rock last evening after you were
gone. I heard a strange story; the story of a weak man, a strong
man, and a God who was very kind."

Ollie saw that further persuasion was of no avail, and as he left
her, she watched him out of sight for the last time--along the
trail that is nobody knows how old. When he was gone, in obedience
to an impulse she did not try to understand, she ran down the
mountain to the cabin in the Hollow--Young Matt's cabin. And when
the shepherd came in from the hills with his flock he found the
house in such order as only a woman's hand can bring. The table
was set, and his supper cooking on the stove.

"Dad," she asked, "Do you think I know enough now to live in the
city?"

The old man's heart sank. It had come then. Bravely he concealed
his feelings, as he assured her in the strongest terms, that she
knew enough, and was good enough to live anywhere.

"Then," said Sammy; "I know enough, even if I am not good enough,
to live in the hills."

The brown eyes, deep under their shaggy brows, were aglow with
gladness, and there was a note of triumph in the scholar's voice
as he said, "Then you do not regret learning the things I have
tried to teach you? You are sure you have no sorrow for the things
you are losing."

"Regret? Dad. Regret?" The young woman drew herself up and lifted
her arms. "Oh, Dad, I see it all, now; all that you have been
trying in a thousand ways to teach me. You have led me into a new
world, the real world, the world that has always been and must
always be, and in that world man is king; king because he is a
man. And the treasure of his kingdom is the wealth of his
manhood."

"And the woman, Sammy, the woman?"

"'And they twain shall be one flesh.'"

Then the master knew that his teaching had not been in vain. "I
can lead you no farther, my child," he said with a smile. "You
have passed the final test."

She came close to him, "Then I want my diploma," she said, for he
had told her about the schools.

Reverently the old scholar kissed her brow. "This is the only
diploma I am authorized to give--the love and homage of your
teacher."

"And my degree?" She waited with that wide, questioning look in
her eyes.

"The most honorable in all the world--a sure enough lady."


CHAPTER XXXI.

CASTLE BUILDING.


The corn was big enough to cultivate the first time, and Young
Matt with Old Kate was hard at work in the field west of the
house.

It was nearly three weeks since the incident at the mill, since
which time the young fellow had not met Sammy Lane to talk with
her. He had seen her, though, at a distance nearly every day, for
the girl had taken up her studies again, and spent most of her
time out on the hills with the shepherd. That day he saw her as
she turned into the mill road at the lower corner of the field, on
her way to the Forks. And he was still thinking of her three hours
later, as he sat on a stump in the shade of the forest's edge,
while his horse was resting.

Young Matt recalled the fight at the mill with a wild joy in his
heart. Under any circumstances it was no small thing to have
defeated the champion strong man and terror of the hills. It was a
glorious thing to have done the deed for the girl he loved, and
under her eyes. Sammy might give herself to Ollie, now, and go far
away to the great world, but she could never forget the man who
had saved her from insult, when her lover was far too weak to save
even himself. And Young Matt would stay in the hills alone, but
always he would have the knowledge and the triumph of this thing
that he had done. Yes, it would be easier now, but still--still
the days would be years when there was no longer each morning the
hope that somewhere before the day was gone he would see her.

The sun fell hot and glaring on the hillside field, and in the air
was the smell of the freshly turned earth. High up in the blue a
hawk circled and circled again. A puff of air came sighing through
the forest, touched lightly the green blades in the open, slipped
over the ridge, and was lost in the sky beyond. Old Kate, with
head down, was dreaming of cool springs in shady dells, and a
little shiny brown lizard with a bright blue tail crept from under
the bottom rail of the fence to see why the man was so still.

The man turned his head quickly; the lizard dodged under the rail;
and old Kate awoke with a start. Someone was coming along the road
below. Young Matt knew the step of that horse, as well as he knew
the sound of old Kate's bell, or the neigh of his own sorrel.

The brown pony stopped at the lower corner of the field, and a
voice called, "You'd better be at work. I don't believe you have
ploughed three rows since I passed."

The big fellow went eagerly down the hill to the fence. "I sure
ought to o' done better'n that, for it's been long enough since
you went by. I always notice, though, that it gets a heap farther
to the other side of the field and back about this time o' day.
What's new over to the Forks?"

Sammy laughed, "Couldn't hear a thing but how the champion strong
man was beaten at his own game. Uncle Ike says, 'Ba thundas! You
tell Young Matt that he'd better come over. A man what can ride
Wash Gibbs a bug huntin' is too blamed good a man t' stay at home
all th' time. We want him t' tell us how he done it. Ba thundas!
He'll be gittin' a job with th' gov'ment next. What!'"

The man crossed his arms on the top rail of the worm fence, and
laughed. It was good to have Sammy deliver her message in just
that way. "I reckon Uncle Ike thinks I ought to go dancin' all
over the hills now, with a chip on my shoulder," he said.

"I don't think you'll do that," she returned. "Dad Howitt
wouldn't, would he? But I must hurry on now, or Daddy's supper
won't be ready when he comes in. I stopped to give you these
papers for your father." She handed him the package. "And--and I
want to thank you, Matt, for what you did at the mill. All my life
you have been fighting for me, and--and I have never done anything
for you. I wish I could do something--something that would show
you how--how I care."

Her voice faltered. He was so big and strong, and there was such a
look of hopeless love and pain on his rugged face--a face that was
as frank and open as a child's. Here was a man who had no need for
the shallow cunning of little fox-like men. This one would go open
and bold on his way, and that which he could not take by his
strength he would not have. Had she not seen him in battle? Had
she not seen his eyes like polished steel points? Deep down in her
heart, the woman felt a thrill of triumph that such a man should
stand so before her. She must go quickly.

Young Matt climbed slowly up the hill again to his seat on the
stump. Here he watched until across the Hollow he saw the pony and
his rider come out of the timber and move swiftly along the ridge;
watched until they faded into a tiny spot, rounded the mountain
and disappeared from sight. Then, lifting his eyes, he looked away
beyond the long blue line that marked the distant horizon. Some
day he would watch Sammy ride away and she would go on, and on,
and on, beyond that blue line, put of his life forever.

Ollie had gone over there to live, and the shepherd had come from
there. What was that world like, he wondered. Between the young
man of the mountains and that big world yonder there had always
been a closely shut door. He had seen the door open to Ollie, and
now Sammy stood on the threshold. Would it ever open for him? And,
if it did, what? Then came a thought that made his blood leap.
Might he not force it open? The shepherd had told him of others
who had done so.

Young Matt felt a strong man's contempt for the things Ollie had
gotten out of the world, but he stood in awe before Mr. Howitt. He
told himself, now, that he would look for and find the things
yonder that made Dad the man he was. He would carry to the task
his splendid strength. Nothing should stop him. And Sammy, when
she understood that he was going away to be like the shepherd,
would wait awhile to give him his chance. Surely, she would wait
when he told her that. But how should he begin?

Looking up again, his eye caught a slow, shifting patch of white
on the bench above Lost Creek, where the little stream begins its
underground course. The faint bark of a dog came to him through
the thin still air, and the patch of white turned off into the
trail that leads to the ranch. "Dad!" exclaimed the young man in
triumph. Dad should tell him how. He had taught Sammy.

And so while the sunlight danced on the green field, and old Kate
slept in the lengthening shadows of the timber, the lad gave
himself to his dreams and built his castles--as we all have
builded.

His dreaming was interrupted as the supper bell rang, and, with
the familiar sound, a multitude of other thoughts came crowding
in; the father and mother--they were growing old. Would it do to
leave them alone with the graves on the hill yonder, and the
mystery of the Hollow? And there was the place to care for, and
the mill. Who but Young Matt could get work from the old engine?

It was like the strong man that the fight did not last long. Young
Matt's fights never lasted very long. By the time he had unhitched
old Kate from the cultivator, it was finished. The lad went down
the hill, his bright castles in ruin--even as we all have gone, or
must sometime go down the hill with our brightest castles in ruin.


CHAPTER XXXII.

PREPARATION.


That same night, Mr. Lane told his daughter that he would leave
home early the next morning to be gone two days. Jim was cleaning
his big forty-five when he made the announcement.

Sammy paused with one hand on the cupboard door to ask, "With Wash
Gibbs, Daddy?"

"No, I ain't goin' with Wash; but I'll likely meet up with him
before I get back." There was a hint of that metallic ring in the
man's voice.

The girl placed her armful of dishes carefully on the cupboard
shelf; "You're--you're not going to forget your promise, are you,
Daddy Jim?"

The mountaineer was carefully dropping a bit of oil into the lock
of his big revolver. "No, girl, I ain't forgettin' nothin'. This
here's the last ride I aim to take with Wash. I'm goin' to see him
to,"--he paused and listened carefully to the click, click, click,
as he tested the action of his weapon--"to keep my promise."

"Oh, Daddy, Daddy, I'm so glad! I wanted this more than I ever
wanted anything in all my life before. You're such a good Daddy to
me, I never could bear to see you with that bad, bad man." She was
behind his chair now, and, stooping, laid her fresh young cheek
against the swarthy, furrowed face.

The man sat like a grim, stone image, his eyes fixed on the gun
resting on his knees. Not until she lifted her head to stand erect
behind his chair, with a hand on each shoulder, did he find words.
"Girl, there's just one thing I've got to know for sure before I
go to-morrow. I reckon I'm right, but somehow a man can't never
tell about a woman in such things. Will you tell your Daddy,
Sammy?"

"Tell what, Daddy Jim?" the girl asked, her hands stealing up to
caress her father's face.

"What answer will you give to Young Matt when he asks you what
Ollie did?"

"But why must you know that before you go to-morrow?"

"'Cause I want to be plumb sure I ain't makin' no mistake in
sidin' with the boy in this here trouble."

"You couldn't make a mistake in doing that, Daddy, no matter
whether I--no matter what--but perhaps Matt will not ask me what
Ollie did."

Just a ray of humor touched the dark face. "I ain't makin' no
mistake there. I know what the man will do." He laid the gun upon
the table, and reaching up caught the girl's hand. "But I want to
know what you'll say when he asks you. Tell me, honey, so I'll be
plumb certain I'm doin' right."

Sammy lowered her head and whispered in his ear.

"Are you sure this time, girl, dead sure?"

"Oh, I'm so sure that it seems as if I--I couldn't wait for him to
come to me. I never felt this way before, never."

The mountaineer drew his daughter into his arms, and held her
close, as he said, "I ain't afraid to do it, now, girl."

The young woman was so occupied with her own thoughts and the
emotions aroused by her father's question, that she failed to note
the ominous suggestion that lay under his words. So she entered
gaily into his plans for her during his two days' absence.

Jim would leave early in the morning, and Sammy was to stay with
her friend, Mandy Ford, over on Jake Creek. Mr. Lane had arranged
with Jed Holland to do the milking, so there would be no reason
for the girl's return until the following evening, and she must
promise that she would not come home before that time. Sammy
promised laughingly. He need not worry; she and Mandy had not had
a good visit alone for weeks.

When his daughter had said good-night, Jim extinguished the light,
and slipping the big gun inside his shirt went to sit outside the
cabin door with his pipe. An hour passed. Sammy was fast asleep.
And still the man sat smoking. A half hour more went by. Suddenly
the pipe was laid aside, and Jim's hand crept inside his shirt to
find the butt of the revolver. His quick ear had caught the sound
of a swiftly moving horse coming down the mountain.

The horse stopped at the gate and a low whistle came out of the
darkness. Leaving his seat, Sammy's father crossed the yard, and,
a moment later, the horse with its rider was going on again down
the trail toward the valley below and the distant river.

Jim waited at the gate until the sound of the horse's feet had
died away in the night. Then he returned to the cabin. But even as
he walked toward the house, a dark figure arose from a clump of
bushes within a few feet of the spot where Jim and the horseman
had met. The figure slipped noiselessly away into the forest.

The next morning Jim carefully groomed and saddled the brown pony
for Sammy, then, leading his own horse ready for the road, he came
to the cabin door. "Going now, Daddy?" said the girl, coming for
the good-by kiss.

"My girl, my girl," whispered the man, as he took her in his arms.

Sammy was frightened at the sight of his face, so strange and
white. "Why Daddy, Daddy Jim, what is the matter?"

"Nothin', girl, nothin'. Only--only you're so like your mother,
girl. She--she used to come just this way when I'd be leavin'.
You're sure like her, and--and I'm glad. I'm glad you're like the
old folks, too. Remember now, stay at Mandy's until to-morrow
evenin'. Kiss me again, honey. Good-by."

He mounted hurriedly and rode away at a brisk gallop. Pulling up a
moment at the edge of the timber, he turned in the saddle to wave
his hand to the girl in the cabin door.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

A RIDE IN THE NIGHT.


Sammy arrived at the Ford homestead in time for dinner, and was
joyfully received by her friend, Mandy. But early in the
afternoon, their pleasure was marred by a messenger from Long
Creek on the other side of the river. Mrs. Ford's sister was very
ill, and Mrs. Ford and Mandy must go at once.

"But Sammy can't stay here alone," protested the good woman.
"Mandy, you'll just have to stay."

"Indeed, she shall not," declared their guest. "I can ride up Jake
Creek to the Forks and stay all night at Uncle Ike's. Brownie will
make it easily in time for supper. You just get your things on and
start right away."

"You'd better hurry; too," put in Mr. Ford. "There's a storm
comin' 'fore long, an' we got t' git across th' river 'fore hit
strikes. I'll be here with th' horses by the time you get your
bonnets on." He hurried away to the barn for his team, while the
women with Sammy's assistance made their simple preparation.

As mother Ford climbed into the big wagon, she said to Sammy,
"Hit's an awful lonely ol' trip fer you, child; an' you must start
right away, so's t' be sure t' get there 'fore hit gets plumb
dark," while Mr. Ford added, as he started the team, "Your pony's
ready saddled, an' if you'll hurry along, you can jest 'bout make
hit. Don't get catched on Jakey in a big rain whatever you do."

"Don't you worry about me," returned the girl, "Brownie and I
could find the way in the dark."

But when her friends were gone, Sammy, womanlike, busied herself
with setting the disordered house aright before she started on her
journey. Watching the clouds, she told herself that there was
plenty of time for her to reach the Postoffice before the storm.
It might not come that way at all, in fact.

But the way up Jake Creek was wild and rough, and along the faint
trail, that twisted and wound like a slim serpent through the
lonely wilderness, Brownie could make but slow time. As they
followed the little path, the walls of the narrow valley grew
steeper, more rocky, and barren; and the road became more and more
rough and difficult, until at last the valley narrowed to a mere
rocky gorge, through which the creek ran, tumbling and foaming on
its way.

It was quite late when Sammy reached the point near the head of
the stream where the trail leads out of the canon to the
road on the ridge above. It was still a good two miles to the
Forks. As she passed the spring, a few big drops of rain came
pattering down, and, looking up, she saw, swaying and tossing in
the wind, the trees that fringed the ledges above, and she heard
the roar of the oncoming storm.

A short way up the side of the mountain at the foot of a great
overhanging cliff, there is a narrow bench, and less than a
hundred feet from where the trail finds its way through a break in
the rocky wall, there is a deep cave like hollow. Sammy knew the
spot well. It would afford excellent shelter.

Pushing Brownie up the steep path, she had reached this bench,
when the rushing storm cloud shut out the last of the light, and
the hills shook with a deafening crash of thunder. Instinctively
the girl turned her pony's head from the trail, and, following the
cliff, reached the sheltered nook, just as the storm burst in all
its wild fury.

The rain came down in torrents; the forest roared; and against the
black sky, in an almost continuous glare of lightning, the big
trees tugged and strained in their wild wrestle with the wind;
while peal after peal of thunder, rolling, crashing, reverberating
through the hills, added to the uproar.

It was over in a little while. The wind passed; the thunder
rumbled and growled in the distance; and the rain fell gently; but
the sky was still lighted by the red glare. Though it was so dark
that Sammy could see the trees and rocks only by the lightning's
flash, she was not frightened. She knew that Brownie would find
the way easily, and, as for the wetting, she would soon be
laughing at that with her friends at the Postoffice.

But, as the girl was on the point of moving, a voice said, "It's a
mighty good thing for us this old ledge happened to be here, ain't
it?" It was a man's voice, and another replied, "Right you are.
And it's a good thing, too, that this blow came early in the
evening."

The speakers were between Sammy and the trail. They had evidently
sought shelter from the storm a few seconds after the girl had
gained her position. In the wild uproar she had not heard them,
and, as they crouched under the cliff, they were hidden by a
projection of the rock, though now and then, when the lightning
flashed, she could see a part of one of the horses. They might be
neighbors and friends. They might be strangers, outlaws even. The
young woman was too wise to move until she was sure.

The first voice spoke again. "Jack got off in good time, did he?"

"Got a good start," replied the other. "He ought to be back with
the posse by ten at the latest. I told him we would meet them at
nine where this trail comes into the big road."

"And how far do you say it is to Jim Lane's place, by the road and
the Old Trail?" asked the first voice.

At the man's words a terrible fear gripped Sammy's heart. "POSSE,"
that could mean only one thing,--officers of the law. But her
father's name and her home--in an instant Jim's strange
companionship with Wash Gibbs, their long mysterious rides
together, her father's agitation that morning, when he said good-
by, with a thousand other things rushed through her mind. What
terrible thing was this that she had happened upon in the night?
What horrible trap had they set for her Daddy, her Daddy Jim? For
trap it was. It could be nothing else. At any risk she must hear
more. She had already lost the other man's reply. Calming herself,
the girl listened eagerly for the next word.

A match cracked. The light flared out, and a whiff of tobacco
smoke came curling around the rock, as one of the men said: "Are
you sure there is no mistake about their meeting at Lane's to-
night?"

"Can't possibly be," came the answer. "I was lying in the brush,
right by the gate when the messenger got there, and I heard Jim
give the order myself. Take it all the way through, unless we make
a slip to-night, it will be one of the prettiest cases I ever
saw."

"Yes," said the other; "but you mustn't forget that it all hinges
on whether or not that bank watchman was right in thinking he
recognized Wash Gibbs."

"The man couldn't be mistaken there," returned the other. "There
is not another man in the country the size of Gibbs, except the
two Matthews's, and of course they're out of the question. Then,
look! Jim Lane was ready to move out because of the drought, when
all at once, after being away several days the very time of the
robbery, he changes his mind, and stays with plenty of money to
carry him through. And now, here we are to-night, with that same
old Bald Knobber gang, what's left of them, called together in the
same old way by Jim himself, to meet in his cabin. Take my word
for it, we'll bag the whole outfit, with the rest of the swag
before morning. It's as sure as fate. I'm glad that girl is away
from home, though."

Sammy had heard enough. As the full meaning of the officers' words
came to her, she felt herself swaying dizzily in the saddle and
clung blindly to the pony's mane for support. Then something in
her brain kept beating out the words, "Ride, Ride, Ride."

Never for an instant did Sammy doubt her father. It was all some
horrible mistake. Her Daddy Jim would explain it all. Of course he
would, if--if she could only get home first. But the men were
between her and the path that led to the road.

Then all at once she remembered that Young Matt had told her how
Sake Creek hollow headed in the pinery below the ridge along which
they went from Fall Creek to the Forks. It might be that this
bench at the foot of the ledge would lead to a way out.

As quick as thought the girl slipped to the ground, and taking
Brownie by the head began feeling her way along the narrow shelf.
Dead leaves, tangled grass and ferns, all wet and sodden, made a
soft carpet, so that the men behind the rock heard no sound. Now
and then the lightning revealed a glimpse of the way for a short
distance, but mostly she trusted blindly to her pony's instinct.
Several times she stumbled over jagged fragments of rock that had
fallen from above, cutting her hand and bruising her limbs
cruelly. Once, she was saved from falling over the cliff by the
little horse's refusal to move. A moment she stood still in the
darkness; then the lightning showed a way past the dangerous
point.

After a time that seemed hours, she noticed that the ledge had
become no higher than her head, and that a little farther on the
bench was lost in the general slope of the hill. She had reached
the head of the hollow. A short climb up the side of the mountain,
and, pushing through the wet bushes, she found herself in the
road. She had saved about three miles. It was still nearly five to
her home. An instant later the girl was in her saddle, and the
brown pony was running his best.

Sammy always looked back upon that ride in the darkness, and,
indeed, upon all that happened that night, as to a dream of
horror. As she rode, that other night came back to her, the night
she had ridden to save the shepherd, and she lived over again that
evening in the beautiful woods with Young Matt. Oh, if he were
only with her now! Unconsciously, at times, she called his name
aloud again and again, keeping time to the beat of her pony's
feet. At other times she urged Brownie on, and the little horse,
feeling the spirit of his mistress, answered with the best he had
to give. With eager, outstretched head, and wide nostrils, he ran
as though he understood the need.

How dark it was! At every bound they seemed plunging into a black
wall. What if there should be a tree blown across the road? At the
thought she grew faint. She saw herself lying senseless, and her
father carried away to prison. Then rallying, she held her seat
carefully. She must make it as easy as possible for Brownie, dear
little Brownie. How she strained her eyes to see into the black
night! How she prayed God to keep the little horse!

Only once in a lifetime, it seemed to her, did the pony's iron
shoe strike sparks of fire from the rocks, or the lightning give
her a quick glimpse of the road ahead. They must go faster,
faster, faster. Those men should not--they should not have her
Daddy Jim; not unless Brownie stumbled.

Where the road leaves the ridge for Fall Creek Valley, Sammy never
tightened the slack rein, and the pony never shortened his stride
by so much as an inch. It was well that he was hill bred, for none
but a mountain horse could have kept his feet at such a terrific
pace down the rocky slope. Down the valley road, past the mill,
and over the creek they flew; then up the first rise of the ridge
beyond. The pony was breathing hard now, and the girl encouraged
him with loving words and endearing terms; pleading with him to go
on, go on, go on.

