"Yes, that was it; if that is true, people should never be sick,"
said Dorothy, with a little sigh. "No, and they would not be if
they only knew how to let the divine Mind control them. You are
going to learn how, Dorothy, and so find yourself growing strong
and well with every day," said Mrs. Minturn, with a cheery smile.

"I wish I knew more about it," Dorothy wistfully observed. "Mamma,
why cannot we have a book like Mrs. Minturn's?"

"We will have, dear," was the prompt response. "Have you had
enough?"--as the girl gently put away the half-eaten slice of
toast.

"Yes, when I have had the milk." She drank it all and then lay
back, smiling contentedly. "It is so nice not to have any pain,"
she added; "it makes me love everybody. Ha! Uncle Phil"--for the
man was peering in at the door, unable to keep away a moment
longer--"come here and I will kiss you 'good-morning.'"

Mrs. Seabrook could bear no more and stole away with her tray to
hide the tears she could no longer restrain.

Mrs. Minturn followed her.

"I am going now," she said, "but I shall continue to work for
Dorrie all day, at intervals, and will run over now and then. All
is going well, so 'be not afraid, only believe.'"

"How can I ever express what is in my heart?" faltered Mrs.
Seabrook, tears raining over her face.

"You do not need to try, for I know it all, having once been
almost where Dorrie seemed to be last night," her friend returned.
"But do not make a marvel of it--just know that God's ways are
'divinely natural,' and that it is unnatural for anything but
health and harmony to exist in His universe. I have left my book,
and you can read to her if she expresses a wish to have you do
so."

There were very grateful, reverent hearts in the Hunt cottage that
day and during the days that followed, for Dorothy continued to
improve rapidly and steadily, and there was no return of the old
pain that had made life so wretched for her for years.

The fourth day after her long night-watch Mrs. Minturn sent a
roomy carriage--the back seat piled with down coverlids--"to take
them all for a drive."

Dr. Stanley, still governed largely by the "old thought," would
have vetoed such a suggestion under different circumstances, and
claimed that the child was still too weak to attempt anything of
the kind. But he felt that he, himself, was now under orders, and
meekly refrained from even expressing an opinion.

So they thankfully accepted their neighbor's kindness, and when he
saw Dorrie's delight in being once more out of doors, when he met
her dancing eyes and noted the faint color coming into her cheeks
and lips, and every day realized that she was getting stronger,
something within seemed to tell him that she would yet be well;
and--figuratively speaking--he reverently took off his materia
medica hat to Mrs. Minturn and secretly registered the vow of Ruth
to Naomi--"Thy people shall be my people and thy God my God."

One evening, after Dorothy was in bed and asleep, he came upon his
sister in the upper hall reading "Science and Health," and he
smiled, for since the night of their great trial she had literally
devoured the book every spare moment she could get.

"Have you written Will anything about our recent experiences?" he
inquired, as she glanced up at him.

"No; and I am not going to--just yet. Of course, I have written
him," she hastened to add, "but I have said nothing about Dorrie,
except that she is improving. I think"--thoughtfully--"I will make
'open confession' by another week, for I had a talk with Mrs.
Minturn, this afternoon, and she feels that it is hardly fair,
that she is not quite justified to go on with the treatment
without his consent."

"Suppose he should still object?" suggested Dr. Stanley.

"Oh, he will not--he cannot when he learns the truth and of the
great change in her; that the old pain is gone and she sleeps the
whole night through," earnestly returned Mrs. Seabrook, but
flushing hotly, for she had been secretly dreading to tell her
husband of the responsibility she had assumed.

"Well, when you are ready to write let me know, for I also shall
have something to say to him," said her brother, gravely.

A week later two voluminous letters, charged with matter of
serious import, went sailing over the ocean on their way to Paris,
where it was expected they would find Prof. Seabrook, who, having
turned his face home-ward, would spend the last week of August
there.

Each was characteristic of the writer; the mother's touchingly
pathetic in describing the "valley of the shadow" through which
they had passed, and glowing with love and gratitude to God in
view of the present hopeful and peaceful conditions; closing with
an earnest, even piteous, appeal for her husband's unqualified
consent to continue Christian Science treatment.

The young physician was no less earnest in laying the case before
his brother-in-law, but rather more logical and philosophical in
discussing it, as well as very positive in his deductions. In
conclusion he wrote:

"Perhaps you may be surprised to learn that I have been reading up
on this subject during the last few months; but, as I have also
been practicing medicine, at the same time, the mental conflict
has been something indescribable. I told myself, in my presumption
and egotism, that if there was healing power in Christian Science
I would look into it and utilize it in connection with my own
methods. The result has been a state of perpetual fizz--I know no
better word to describe it; and now, after our recent experience,
I find myself willing to sit humbly at the feet of higher
authority and learn of a better and more efficacious healing art
than I know of at present. For, I tell you in plain terms, Dorothy
was dying--she was past all human aid when that blessed woman
came, like an angel of peace, to us and in one night brought back
our darling from the border of the unseen world. She, with her
understanding of Christian Science, saved her. There can be no
doubt on that point, and the child is better than I have ever seen
her since her accident. There has been no return of pain, and you
can imagine what that means to us all. She sleeps well, and has a
healthy, normal appetite. But Mrs. Minturn is very conscientious--
says she cannot work in a divided household, and must have your
approval, if she is to go on with the good work. Now, Will, be a
man; put your prejudices away on some upper shelf--or, better
still, cast them to the winds; pocket your ecclesiastical and
intellectual pride, and give Dorrie a chance. I am convinced
'there is more in this philosophy than we have ever dreamed of,'
and I am going to know more about it. Cable just two words--'go
on'--if you are willing, and, at the rate she is going on now,
I'll wager a hat against a cane that you won't know your own
daughter when you arrive. Bring the cane, please! In the same
spirit of good fellowship as ever. "Affectionately yours, "PHIL."

There was a season of anxious, yet blessed, waiting after these
letters were dispatched. A benedick may have had a frivolous
misinterpretation with his wife that do him symptom of
intuition, so that his countenance gives mark of it as he comes
away of the firm in the morning. The trouble which has given him
such physical anxiousness is one which he ought to hide.Minturn was constantly
admonishing, "Let not your heart be troubled," and working to
demonstrate that there could be no opposition to Truth and that
the work, so well begun, could not be hindered by bigotry, pride
or self-will.

At last, one morning there came a cable message--just two words,
as Phillip Stanley had requested, but not what he had asked for.

"'Sail to-day,'" Mrs. Seabrook read aloud from the yellow slip,
and lost color as she looked anxiously into her brother's eyes and
questioned:

