
There were four in their party but it was only with Alfred Baldwin that
Mary Wollaston danced. The other man--Black his name was, and he came
from Iowa City or Dubuque or thereabouts--devoted all his attention to
Baldwin's wife. He was very rich, very much married--out in Iowa--and
whenever he made his annual business trip to New York, he liked to have a
real New York time. They had dined together at the Baldwins' apartment
with a vague idea of going afterward to see a play of Baldwin's then
drawing toward the close of a successful season's run. But dinner had
been late and they had lingered too long over it to make this excursion
worth while. It had amused both Mary and Christabel to discover Black's
secret hope of being taken back-stage and introduced to the beautiful
young star who was playing in the piece and taking her out to supper with
them. He didn't know that Baldwin hated her with a perfect hatred and
never got within speaking distance of her if he could help it.

So, by way of making up to the western visitor for his disappointment
they taxied up-town about ten o'clock to the brightest, loudest and most
fantastically expensive of New York's dancing restaurants. Once there, he
took command of the party; confidently addressed the head waiter by his
first name and began "opening wine" with a lavish hand. He was flirting
in what he conceived to be quite a desperate and depraved manner with
Christabel, and what enhanced his pleasure in this entertainment was that
he did it all right under the nose of the husband, who obviously didn't
mind a bit. He would talk eloquently when he got home, with carefully
selected corroborative details, about the wickedness of New York.

Mary liked the Baldwins. Christabel was on the executive committee of
their Fund and one of the best and steadiest and most sensible supporters
it had. She was a real person. Baldwin, himself, whom she hadn't known so
long nor so well and had regarded from afar as a rather formidable
celebrity, proved on better acquaintance, though witty and sophisticated,
to be as comfortable as an old glove. Altogether they were the nearest
thing to friends that her long sojourn in New York had given her. She had
sometimes thought rather wildly of putting them to the test and seeing
whether they were real friends or not.

To-night, though, even they irritated her. She wished Christabel would
snub that appalling bounder, Black, as he deserved. How could she go on
playing up to him like that! As for Baldwin, she wished he would just
dance with her and not talk. She supposed that the amount of alcohol they
had consumed since seven o'clock had something to do with his verging
upon the vein, the Broadway sentimental vein, that he had got started on
and couldn't seem to let alone.

It wasn't new to Mary. Indeed it was a phenomenon familiarly associated
in her mind with Forty-second Street restaurants and late hours and
strong drink, particularly gin. The crocodile tear for the good woman who
stayed at home; who didn't know; who never, please God! should know. The
tribute to flower-like innocence--the paper flower-like innocence of the
stage _ingenue_!

Baldy wasn't as bad as that, couldn't ever conceivably be as bad as that,
no matter how much he had had to drink. Perhaps, if she had not been
hypersensitive to-night,--in an impossible mood for any sort of party
really--she might have failed to detect the familiar strain in his
sensible, rather fatherly talk. As it was, she thought she did detect it
and it made her want to scream--or swear!

There is one point to be urged in Baldy's defense that Mary never learned
to allow for. Gin or no gin, the effect of contrast she presented to her
surroundings in a place like this, her look of a seraphic visitor gone
astray, would have given any one the impulse, at least, to rush to the
rescue. To begin with, it was not possible to credit her with the
twenty-five years she truly claimed; nineteen, in a soft colored evening
frock like the one she had on to-night, was about what one would have
guessed. Then, you never would have believed, short of discovering the
fact yourself, how strong she was; her slenderness and the fine
articulation of her joints made her look fragile. Her coloring helped the
illusion along, the clear unsophisticated blue of her eyes, the pallor of
her hair that the petals of a tea-rose could have got lost in,--it was,
literally, just about the tint of unbleached linen--and the pearly
translucence of her skin. If you got the opportunity to look close enough
to see that there wasn't a grain of powder upon it, not even between the
shoulder blades, it made you think of flower petals again. What clenched
the effect was her healthy capacity for complete relaxation when no
effort was required of her. She drooped a little and people thought she
looked tired. She never could see herself like that and never made due
allowance for the effect she produced, invariably upon strangers and not
infrequently upon an old friend.

To-night, she lacked the name to label her mood by, rejecting rather
fiercely the one that kept offering itself. You couldn't be homesick when
home was the last place in the world you wanted to go back to--the place
you were desperately marshaling reasons for staying away from.

It was the non-appearance of her brother, Rush, that had brought a lot of
dispersed feelings to a focus. She had heard nothing later from him than
the letter she referred to when she last wrote to her father. She had
expected a cable and it hadn't come. She had this morning gone over to
Hoboken to meet the transport he had said he expected to sail on, but
having got down to the pier a little late, after the debarkation had
begun, she could not be sure that she hadn't missed him. So she had gone
back to her tiny flat in Waverly Place and had spent the rest of the day
there, vainly hoping that he would turn up or at least that she should
get some word of him. And sitting around like that for hours and hours
she had, which was a silly thing to do, let her thoughts run wild over
things--a thing--that there was simply no sense in thinking about at all.

It was an odd fact, which she had noted long before today, that anything
connected with home, a letter from her father or her aunt, news of the
doings of any of her Chicago friends (the birth of Olive Corbett's second
baby, for example), any vivid projection of a bit of the pattern of the
life into which she had once been woven, roused that nightmare memory. Or
gave, rather, to a memory which normally did not trouble her much, the
quality of a nightmare; a moment of paralyzed incredulity that it could
have happened to her; a pang of clear horror that it really and truly had
happened to her very self; to this Mary Wollaston who still lived in the
very place where it had happened.

This afternoon, while she had sat awaiting from moment to moment the
appearance of her brother, or at least the sound of his voice over the
telephone, the pang had been prolonged into an agony. She had let herself
drift into a fantastic speculation of a sort that was perfectly new. What
if the boy who had shared that crazy adventure with her, himself an
officer bound overseas, had fallen in with Rush, made friends with him,
told him the story!

This was pure melodrama, she knew. There was, in any external sense,
nothing to be feared. The thing had happened almost a year ago. It had
had no consequences--except this inexplicable one that her brother's
approach brought back the buried memory of it. Why should it cling like
that? Like an acid that wouldn't wash off! She was not, as far as her
mind went, ashamed of it. Never had been. But, waiving all the
extenuating circumstances--which had really surrounded the act--admitting
that it was a sin (this thing that she had done once and had, later,
learned the impossibility of ever doing again), was it any worse than
what her brother had probably done a score of times?

What was this brother of hers going to be like? It wasn't possible, of
course, that she would find him the boy he had been five years ago,
before he went to France--though from some of his letters one might have
thought he hadn't changed a bit. Wasn't it likely that he'd turn out to
be some one she could cling to a little; confide her perplexities
to--some of them? Was there a chance that ripened, disillusioned, made
gentle and wise by the alchemy of the furnace he had come through, he
might prove to be the one person in the world to whom she could confide
everything? That would make an end to her nightmare, she felt sure.

The question whether he was or was not going to turn out like that was
one presently to be answered. Until she knew the answer she didn't want
to think at all, least of all about those things which Baldy's talk
to-night kept rousing echoes of.

"Oh, they all look good when they're far away," she said, picking that
bit of comic supplement slang deliberately to annoy him. "I don't believe
our grandfathers and grandmothers were always such models of decorum as
they tried, when they had grown old, to make us think. And the simple
primitive joys ... I believe an old-fashioned husking bee, if they had
plenty of hard cider to go with it, was just as bad as this--coarser if
not so vulgar. After all, most of these people will go virtuously home
to bed pretty soon and you'd find them back at work to-morrow morning not
any the worse, really, for this. It may be a rather poor sort of home
they go to, but how do you know that the vine-covered cottage you have
been talking about was any better?"

"Not to mention," he added, in humorous concurrence, "that there was
probably typhoid in the well the old oaken bucket hung in. It seems odd
to be convicted of sentimentality by an innocent babe like you. But if
you had been looking at the party down at the end table behind you that
I've had under my eye for ten minutes, perhaps you'd feel more as I do.
No! don't turn around; they have been looking at us."

"Moralizing over us, perhaps," she suggested. "Thinking how wicked we
probably were."

"No," he said, "I happen to know the girls. They live down in our part of
town, just over in the Village, that is. They have been here six or eight
years. One of them was quite a promising young illustrator once. And
they're both well-bred--came obviously from good homes. And they've both
gone, well--clean over the edge."

Somehow his innocent euphemism annoyed her. "You mean they are
prostitutes?" she asked.

He frowned in protest at her employment of the word but assented
unequivocally. He was used--as who is not--to hearing young women discuss
outspokenly such topics but he couldn't forgive it from one who looked
like Mary Wollaston.

"I have a hunch," he said, "that the two boys who are with them are
officers out of uniform. I noticed that they looked the other way
pretty carefully when that major who is sitting at the next table to
ours came in."

"Let's dance again," she said. "I love this Hawaiian Moonlight thing."

He saw her take the opportunity that rising from the table gave her for
a good square look at the party he had been talking about and some change
in her manner made him say with quick concern, "What is it?"

But she ignored the question and stepped out upon the floor with him.
They had danced half-way round the room when she said quietly, "One of
the boys at that table is my brother Rush."

Baldwin said, "He has seen you, I think." He felt her give a sort of gasp
before she replied but the words came steadily enough.

"Oh, yes, we saw each other at the same time."

He said nothing more, just went on dancing around the room with her in
silence, taking care, without appearing to do so, to cut the corner where
Rush was sitting, rather broadly. After two or three rounds of the floor,
she flagged a little and without asking any questions, he led her back to
their table. Luckily, Christabel and her Iowan had disappeared.

As soon as she was seated she asked him for a pencil and something she
could write on--a card of his, the back of an old letter, anything. She
wrote, "Won't you please come and ask me to dance?" and she slid it over
to him. He read it and understood, picked up a busboy with his eye and
despatched him with the folded scrap for delivery to Captain Wollaston at
the end table.

Mary meanwhile had cradled her chin in her palms and closed her eyes.
She had experienced so clear a premonition before she turned round to
look at the party at the end table that one of those officers out of
uniform would turn out to be Rush that the verification of it had the
quality of something that happens in a dream. She felt a sharp
incredulity that it could really be they, staring at each other across
that restaurant. More than that, the brother she saw was not--in that
first glance--the man she had been trying all day to make up her mind he
would be. Not the new Rush with two palms to his _Croix de Guerre_ and
his American D.S.C.; and the scars in his soul from the experiences
those decorations must represent; but the Rush she had said good-by to
in the autumn of 1914 when he set out to be a freshman at Harvard, the
kid brother she had counciled and occasionally admonished, in the
vicarious exercise of her father's authority. And in his panic-stricken
gaze at her, she had recognized his instinctive acceptance of that
position. Exactly so would he have looked five interminable years ago if
she had caught him in mischief.

Then, like the undertow of a big wave, the reaction caught her. It was
intolerable that he should look at her like that. He who had earned his
manhood and its privileges in the long death grapple with the grimmest of
realities. Certainly she was not the one to cast the first stone at him.
She must contrive somehow, at once, to make that clear to him. The
urgency of the thing lay in her belief that the whole of their future
relationship depended upon the removing of his misapprehension
now--to-night.

She could not go to that table where he sat without seeming more than
ever the school mistress in pursuit of a truant, but perhaps he would
come to her if she put her request right. They had danced together quite
a lot in the old days. She danced so well that not even her status of
elder sister had prevented his enjoying the exercise of their combined
accomplishment.

A horrible misgiving had attacked her when she had scribbled the note and
closed her eyes, that the cocktails and the champagne she herself had
consumed since seven o'clock might have clouded her judgment--if, indeed,
they were not responsible for the whole nightmare. Would she be equal to
following out the line she had set for herself?

But no trace of that misgiving was apparent to her when Rush, after a
wait of only two or three minutes, appeared at her table. She greeted him
with a smile and a Hello, nodded a fleeting farewell to Baldwin and
slipped comfortably into her brother's arms out on the floor. They danced
away without a word. There was the same quite beautiful accord between
them that there had been in the old days, and the sense of this steadied
her. They had gone all the way around the floor before she spoke.

"It is like old times, isn't it?" she said. "And it does seem good. You
don't mind, do you,--for ten minutes?"

"Ten minutes?" he echoed dully.

She knew then, as she had indeed been aware from the first, that he was
drunk and that only by the most painful effort, could he command his
scattered wits at all. It made her want to cry that he should be trying
so hard. She must not cry. That would be the final outrage. She must be
very simple and clear. She must--_must_ contrive to make him understand.

"Will you listen to me, dear, and do exactly what I ask you to? I want
you to go back to your people and forget that you have seen me at all."

"I am going to take you home--out of this," he said laboriously.

"I'm going home soon, but not with you. I want you to go back to--to the
girl you brought here. No, dear, listen. This is the only reason I sent
for you. To tell you that I wasn't going to try to scold you. I don't
mind a bit. I want to tell you that, so that when you come back to me
to-morrow or next day or whenever your party is quite over, you won't
feel that you have anything to try to explain or apologize for. Now take
me back to my place and then go on to yours."

"I won't take you back to him," he said doggedly. "What do you think I
am? I'm drunk, but not enough for that. I am going to take you home."

She tried to laugh but in spite of herself it was more like a sob.

"Rush, dear, don't be silly. I am perfectly all right--or would be if I
hadn't drunk quite so much champagne. They'll take me home. His wife's
here with him and they're old friends of mine. They know a lot of our
friends in Chicago. Please, Rush...."

"Do you think I'd go back to that--" he managed to pull up on the edge
of an ugly word--"back to those people, and leave you here? Is it your
wrap on that chair? We'll stop and get it and then we'll go."

She could have wept with vexation over the way her scheme had gone awry
but there was clearly nothing else to do. She retrieved her cloak, simply
said good night to Christabel and the man named Black, leaving Baldy to
explain things as he chose.

Five minutes later she gave a taxi driver the address of her flat and
dropped back against the cushions beside her brother. Neither of them
spoke a word during that fifteen-minute drive. Mary wept quietly most of
the way--it didn't matter there in the dark. The thought of this splendid
glorious brother of hers painfully endeavoring to drag himself back into
a state of sobriety from his first wild caper after long wearing of the
harness of discipline--an escapade she supposed that he must have been
looking forward to for days--dragging himself back to protect her--oh, it
was too hopeless! Should she ever be able to explain to him why she had
sent for him, and that her intentions had been the opposite of those of
the moralizing meddler he would take her for? If only she could make it
up to him somehow. She would have liked to reach over and pull him down
into her arms, mother him and tell him not to mind--there was something
so intolerably pathetic about his effort to sit soberly straight--but she
resisted this impulse savagely. The alcohol in her own veins was
responsible for this. She could not quite trust herself not to go
maudlin. So she froze herself tight and huddled away from him into her
own corner.

She did not think beyond the address she had given to the chauffeur until
they pulled up at her door. Then she turned to Rush and asked, "Where
shall he take you? Are you staying at a hotel?"

"I am going to take you home," he said precisely.

She saw she did not dare to let him go. There was no telling what serious
trouble he might get into, in his illicit civilian dress, if she turned
him adrift now. So she said, simply, "Well, here we are. Come in."

She opened the street door with her latch-key, and punched on the hall
lights. She dreaded the two flights of stairs, but with the help of the
banister rail he negotiated them successfully enough. And then he was
safely brought to anchor in her sitting-room. It was plain he had not the
vaguest idea where he was.

"I'll make some coffee," she said. "That will--pull us both together. And
it won't take a minute because it's all ready to make for breakfast."

She was not gone, indeed, much longer than that, but when she came back
from her kitchenette he had dropped like a log upon her divan, submerged
beyond all soundings. So she tugged him around into a more comfortable
position, managed to divest him of his dinner-jacket and his waistcoat,
unbuttoned his collar and shirt-band, took off his shoes, and covered him
up with an eiderdown quilt. Then she kissed him--it was five years since
she had done that--and went, herself, to bed.

At ten o'clock the next morning she sat behind her little breakfast
table--it was daintily munitioned with a glass coffee machine, a
grapefruit and a plate of toast--waiting, over _The Times_, for Rush to
wake up. She looked more seraphic than ever, enveloped in a white turkish
toweling bathrobe and with her hair in a braid. Her brother lay on the
divan just as she had left him the night before. Presently the change in
his breathing told her that he was struggling up out of the depths of
sleep. She looked over at him and saw him blinking at the ceiling. When
his gaze started round her way, she turned her attention to the busy
little coffee machine which opportunely needed it.

It was a minute or two before he spoke. "Is that really you, Mary?"

She smiled affectionately at him and said, "Hello," adding with just an
edge of good-humored mischief, "How do you feel?"

He turned abruptly away from her. "I feel loathsome," he said.

"Poor dear, of course you do. I'll tell you what to do. I've got a nice
big bathroom in there. Go in and take a cold one." Then--"You've grown
inches, Rush, since you went away but I believe you could still get into
a suit of my pajamas--plain ones, not ruffly. Anyhow, I've another big
bathrobe like this that you could roll up in. You'll be just in time for
the coffee. You won't know yourself by then."

"I wish I didn't," he said morosely.

There wasn't much good arguing with that mood, she knew, so she
waited a little.

"Is this where you live?" he asked. "You brought me here last night?"

"You brought me," she amended.

He frowned over that but didn't take it in. The next moment though he
sat up suddenly and after a struggle with the giddiness this movement
caused, asked, "Who else is here? Where's the other girl that lives
with you?"

"She's not here now," Mary said. "We are all by ourselves."

He rose unsteadily to his feet. "I've got to get out of here quick. If
anybody came in ..."

"Rush, dearest!" she entreated. "Don't be silly. Lie down again--Well,
then take that easy chair. Nobody will come in." Then over his air of
resolute remorse she cried, on the edge of tears herself, "Oh, _please_
don't be so unhappy. Do let's settle down and be comfy together. I don't
have to go to the office to-day. My job's just about played out. But
nobody ever comes here to see me in the daytime. And it wouldn't matter
if they did."

But this change of attitude was clearly beyond him. "I'll have to ask you
to tell me what happened last night. You were there at that restaurant
with friends of yours I suppose. I must have disgraced you up to the hilt
with them. I should think you'd hate the sight of me."

"You didn't disgrace me at all," she contradicted, and now the tears did
came into her eyes. "They knew I was expecting you and I told Mr. Baldwin
who you were. You came up in the nicest way and asked me to dance and
when we went away together there wasn't a thing--about you--that they
could see. I was on the point of tears myself because my plan had gone
wrong. But that would have seemed natural enough to them."

He frowned at the name Baldwin, as if he were trying to recover a memory.
Now he felt vaguely in his trousers pocket and pulled out the crumpled
visiting card that had her note scribbled on the back of it. "You haven't
told me yet what happened," he said.

"Oh, I was afraid you wouldn't remember." She looked away from him as she
said it and a little unwonted color crept into her cheeks.

"Afraid?" he questioned.

"I wanted you to understand," she said, "and now I'll have to tell you
again. It was because I was trying so hard not to meddle that I did. I
sent that little note to you just to get a chance to tell you not to mind
my seeing you there with those others--not to let it spoil your party. I
couldn't bear to have you come to me to-day, or to-morrow or whenever it
was, feeling--well, ashamed you know, and explanatory. That's what I
tried to tell you last night but couldn't make you understand. So I did,
really, just exactly what I was meaning not to. Of course, I loved you
for coming away and I love having you here like this, all to myself. But
I didn't mean to--to spoil things for you."

He stared at her a moment in blank inapprehension; then a deep blush came
burning into his face. "You didn't understand," he said thickly. "You
didn't know what those girls were."

"Oh, Rush!" she cried. "Of course I did. I knew exactly what they
were--better than you. I even knew who they were. They live not very far
from here."

He paled and his look was frightened. "How did you know that?" he
demanded. "How could you know a thing like that?"

"They've lived here in the Village for years," she said, summarizing
Baldy without quoting him as her authority. "One of them used to be an
illustrator--or something--before she went--over the edge. They're two of
our celebrities. One can't go about, unless he's stone blind, without
picking up things like that."

"You did know what she was, then," he persisted, doggedly pushing
through something it was almost impossible for him to say, "and yet,
knowing, you asked me to leave you alone and go back to her. You wanted
me to do that?"

"I didn't want you to!" she cried. "I hated it, of course. But
men--people--do things like that, and I could see how--natural it was
that you wanted to. And if you wanted to, I didn't think it fair that it
should be spoiled for you just because we happened to recognize each
other. I didn't want you to hate me for having spoiled it. That's all."

She gave him the minute or two he evidently needed for turning this over
in his mind. Then she turned her back on the window she had withdrawn to
and began again.

"I used to be just a big sister to you, of course. Ever so superior, I
guess, and a good bit of a prig. And all this time over there in France
with nothing but my letters and that silly picture of me in the khaki
frame, I suppose you have been thinking of me, well,--as a sort of nice
angel. I'm not either, really. I don't want to be either.

"I want to be somebody you feel would understand anything; somebody you
could tell anything to. So that it would work the other way as well.
Because I've got to have somebody to tell things to,--troubles, and
worries. And I've been hoping, ever since your letter came, that it would
turn out to be you."

"What sort of troubles?" He shot the question in rather tensely.

There was a breathless moment before she answered, but she shook it off
with a laugh and her manner lightened. "There's nothing to be so solemn
about as all that. We don't want to wallow. We'll have some
breakfast--only you go first and tub."

He was too young and healthy and clean-blooded to resist the effect upon
his spirits which the cold water and the fresh white bathrobe and the hot
strong coffee with real cream in it produced. And the gloomy, remorseful
feeling, which he felt it his moral duty to maintain intact, simply
leaked away. She noted the difference in him and half-way through their
breakfast she left her chair and came round to him.

"Would you very much mind being kissed now?" she asked.

His answer, with a laugh, was to pull her down upon his knee and hug
her up tight in his arms. They looked rather absurdly alike in those
two white bathrobes, though this was an appearance neither of them was
capable of observing. She disengaged herself presently from his embrace
and went to find him some cigarettes, refraining from taking one
herself from a feeling that he would probably like it better just then
if she did not.

Back in her own place over her coffee and toast, she had no difficulty in
launching him upon the tale of his own recent experiences. What the
French were like now the war was over; and the Boche he had been living
among in the Coblenz area;--the routine of his army life, the friends he
made over there, and so on. Altogether she built him up immensely in his
own esteem. It was plain he liked having her for a younger sister instead
of for an older one, listening so contentedly to his tales, ministering
to his momentary wants, visibly wondering at and adoring him.

But she broke the spell when she asked him what he meant to do now.

He turned restlessly in his chair. "I don't know," he said. "I don't know
what the deuce there is I can do. Certainly father's idea of my going
back to college and then to medical school afterward, is just plain, rank
nonsense. I'd be a doddering old man before I got through--thirty years
old. I should think that even he would see that. It will have to be
business, I suppose, but if any kind friend comes around and suggests
that I begin at the bottom somewhere--Mr. Whitney, for instance, offering
me a job at ten dollars a week in his bank--I'll kill him. I can't do
that. I won't. At the end of about ten days, I'd run amuck. What I'd
really like," he concluded, "for about a year would be just this." His
gesture indicated the bathrobe, the easy chair and the dainty breakfast
table. "This, all the morning and a ball-game in the afternoon. Lord, it
will be good to see some real baseball again. We'll go to a lot of games
this summer. What are the Sox going to be like this year?"

She discussed the topic expertly with him and with a perfectly genuine
interest, at some length. "Oh, it would be fun," she finished with a
little sigh, "only I shan't be there, you know. At least I don't think I
shall." Then before he could ask her why not, she added in sharper focus,
"I can't go home, Rush."

"Can't!" he exclaimed. "What do you mean by that?"

"Oh, nothing to make a fuss about," she said with a frown of irritation.
"I wish you weren't so jumpy this morning,--or perhaps, it's I that am.
All I meant was that home isn't a comfortable place for me and I won't go
back there if I can help it--only I am afraid I can't. That's the trouble
I wanted to talk to you about."

"I thought you liked the new stepmother," he said. "Hasn't she turned out
well?--What am I supposed to call her, anyhow? I wanted to find out about
that before I was right up against it."

"Call her?" Mary was a little taken back. "Why, anything you like, I
should think. I've always called her Paula.--You weren't thinking of
calling her mother, were you?"

"Well," he protested, "how should I know? After all, she is father's
wife. And she must be fairly old."

"But, Rush, you've _seen_ her!"

"Only that once, at the wedding. She was made up to look young then, of
course. Painted and dyed and so on, I suppose. I felt so embarrassed and
silly over the whole thing--being just a kid--that I hardly looked at
her. And that was a long while ago."

Mary laughed at that, though she knew it would annoy him. "She never
paints nor dyes nor anything, Ruddy. She doesn't have to. She's such a
perfectly raving beauty without it. And she's more beautiful now than she
was then. She really is young, you see. Hardly enough older than we are
to matter, now that we're grown up."

She saw Rush digesting this idea of a beautiful young stepmother whom he
was to be privileged to call--straight off--by her first name, with a
certain satisfaction, so she waited--rather conscious that she was being
patient--for him to come back from the digression of his own accord.
Presently he did.

"What does she do that you don't like?"

"She does nothing that isn't perfectly nice, and good-tempered,
and--respectable," Mary assured him, and added on a warmer note, "Oh, and
she's really amiable and lovely. I was being a cat. But I am truly fond
of her--when I have her to myself. It's when she's with father ..."

She broke off there, seeing that she could not make that clear to him
(how could she since she would not state it in plain terms to herself?)
and hurried on, "It's really father whom I don't get on with, any more.
He worries about me and feels sorry for me and wants me to come home. But
I'm nothing to him when I do come--but an embarrassment.--No, it _isn't_
rot. He knows it himself and feels horrid about it and raises my
allowance when I go away, though it was foolishly big already; and then,
as soon as I'm back here he begins worrying again, and urging me to come
home. He didn't insist as long as I was doing war work, but now that
that's played out, I suppose he will.

"Oh, I know well enough what I ought to do. I ought to answer some
advertisement for a typist--I can do that, but not stenography--and take
a regular job. The sort you said you'd shoot Mr. Whitney for offering
you. And then I ought to take a hall bedroom somewhere in the
cross-town twenties and live on what I earned. That's the only thing I
can see, and, Rush, I simply haven't the courage to do it. It seems as
if I couldn't do it."

His lively horror at the bare suggestion of such a thing drew her into a
half-hearted defense of the project. Numbers of the girls she knew down
here who had been doing war work were going enthusiastically into things
like that--or at least were announcing an invincible determination to do
so. Only they were cleverer than she at that sort of thing and could hope
for better jobs. They were in luck. They liked it--looked forward to a
life of it as one full of engaging possibilities. But to Mary it was
nothing, she hardly pretended, but a forlorn last shift. If one couldn't
draw nor write nor act nor develop some clever musical stunt, what else
was there for a girl to do?

"Well, of course," said Rush, in a very mature philosophical way and
lighting a cigarette pretty deliberately between the words,--"of course,
what most girls do, is--marry somebody." Then he stole a look around at
his sister to see how she had taken it.

There was a queer look that almost frightened him in her blue eyes. Her
lips, which were trembling, seemed to be trying to smile.

"That's father's idea," she said raggedly. "He's as anxious now that I
should marry somebody--anybody, as he was that I shouldn't five years
ago--before he found Paula. You see I am so terribly--left on his hands."

There was, no doubt, something comical about the look of utter
consternation she saw on her brother's face, but she should not have
tried to laugh at him for a sob caught the laugh in the middle and swept
away the last of her self-control. She flung herself down upon the divan
and buried her face in one of the pillows. He had seen men cry like that
but, oddly enough, never a woman. What he did though was perhaps as much
to the point as anything he could have done. He sat down beside her and
gathered her up tight in his arms and held her there without a word until
the tempest had blown itself out. When the sobs had died away to nothing
more than a tremulous catch in each indrawn breath, he let her go back
among the pillows and turn so that she could look up at him. By that time
the sweat had beaded out upon his forehead, and his hands, which had
dropped down upon her shoulders, were trembling.

"Well," she asked unsteadily. "What do you think of me now?"

He wanted to bend down and kiss her but wisely he forbore. "It's easy to
see what's the matter," he said. "This war business you have been doing
has been too much for you. You're simply all in." Then happily he added,
"I'd call you a case of shell-shock."

She rewarded that with a washed-out smile. "What's the treatment going to
be?" she asked.

"Why," he said, "as soon as I'm done tucking you up properly in this
eiderdown quilt, I'm going out to your icebox and try to find the makings
of an egg-nog. Incidentally, I shall scramble up all the rest of the eggs
I find and eat them myself. And then I'll find something dull to read to
you until you go to sleep. When it's dark enough so that my evening
clothes won't attract too much attention, I'll go back and get into
uniform; then I'll buy two tickets for Chicago on the fast train
to-morrow, and two tickets for a show to-night; and then I'll come back
and take you out to dinner. Any criticisms on that program?"

"Not just for this minute," she said contentedly. "I don't know whether
I'm going to Chicago with you, tomorrow, or not."

"That's all right," he said. "I know all about that." He added, "I
hope the other girl won't mind--the one who lives here with you. What
was her name?"

"Ethel Holland? Oh, she went over to France with the Y.M.C.A. just
about a year ago. I've tried to find somebody to take her place, but
there didn't seem to be any one I liked well enough. So I've been
living alone."

She saw his face stiffen at that but his only comment was that that
simplified matters.


CHAPTER IV

THE PICTURE PUZZLE


There was a good quarter of an hour beginning with the tear-blurred
moment when Mary caught sight of her father looking for her and Rush down
the railway station platform, during which the whole fabric of misgivings
about her home-coming dissolved as dreams do when one wakes. It had not
been a dream she knew, nor the mere concoction of her morbid fancy. He
had not looked at her like this nor kissed her like this--not once since
that fatal journey to Vienna five years ago. Had something happened
between him and Paula that made the difference? Or was it her brother's
presence, that, serving somehow to take off the edge, worked a mysterious
catalysis?

When John, after standing off and gazing wordless for a moment at this
new son of his, this man he had never seen, in his captain's uniform with
bits of ribbon on the breast of it,--tried to say how proud he was and
choked instead, it was for Mary that he reached out an unconscious,
embracing arm, the emotion which would not go into words finding an
outlet for itself that way.

When they got out to the motor and old Pete, once coachman, now
chauffeur, his eyes gleaming over the way Rush had all but hugged him,
said to her, "You home to stay, too, Miss Mary?" her father's hand which
clasped her arm revealed the thrilling interest with which he awaited her
answer to that question. The importunity of the red-cap with the luggage
relieved her of the necessity for answering but the answer in her heart
just then was "Yes."

It was with a wry self-scornful smile that she recalled, later that day,
the emotions of the ride home. If at any time before they got to the
house, her father had repeated the old servant's question, "Are you home
to stay, Mary?" she would, she knew, have kissed the hand that she held
clasped in hers, wept blissfully over it and told him she wanted never to
go away again. She hadn't minded his not asking because she thought she
knew quite surely why he had not. He was afraid to risk his momentary
happiness upon her answer. And why had she not volunteered the assurance
he wanted so eagerly and dared not ask for? The beastly answer to that
question was that she had enjoyed the thrill of his uncertainty--a
miserable sort of feline coquetry.

Well, it had been short-lived, that little triumph of hers. It had
stopped against a blank wall just when the car stopped under the _ports
cochère_ of the Dearborn Avenue house. John's arm which had been around
her was withdrawn and he looked with just a touch of ostentation at his
watch. She knew before he spoke that when he did, his tone would ring
flat. The old spell was broken. He was once more under the dominion of
the newer, stronger one.

"I'm terribly late," he said. "I must drive straight along to the
hospital. I'll see you to-night. We're having a few old friends in to
dinner. Run along now. Your Aunt Lucile will be waiting for you."

His omission to mention Paula had been fairly palpable. Her reply, "All
right, dad, till to-night, then. _Au 'voir_" had been, she knew, as
brittle and sharp-edged as a bit of broken glass. It had cut him;--she
had meant it to.

Well it served her right. Paula deserved to own the stronger spell.
Paula's emotional channels were open and deep. No choking snags and
sandbars, no perverse eddies in them. Look at her with Rush to-day! There
was a situation that fairly bristled with opportunities for blundering.
She might, with this grown-up son of her husband's whom she had hardly
seen, have shown herself shy, embarrassed, at a loss how to take him. She
might have tried to be archly maternal with him or elder-sisterly. But
she played up none of these sentimental possibilities, seemed, indeed,
serenely unaware of them. She treated him just as she had always treated
Mary--as a contemporary. From the beginning she had no trouble making him
talk. For one thing her acquaintance with France and Germany was intimate
enough to enable her to ask him questions which he found it pleasantly
stimulating to try to answer. As she felt her way to firmer ground with
him, she allowed what was evidently a perfectly spontaneous affection to
irradiate the look she turned upon him and to warm her lovely voice.

So she must have begun--as simply and irresistibly as that--in Vienna!

Mary tried hard to think of it as a highly skillful performance, but this
was an attitude she could not maintain. It was not a performance at all;
it was--just Paula, who, having taken her father away from her was now,
inevitably, going to take her brother too. Not because she meant
to--quite unconscious that she was doing any harm ("and of course she
isn't, except to a cat like me")--that was the maddening, and at the same
time, endearing thing about her.

For there was a broad impartiality about her spell that tugged at Mary
even while she forlornly watched Rush yielding to it. And the way it
affected Aunt Lucile was simply funny. She melted, visibly, like a
fragment left on the curb by the iceman, whenever Paula--turned the
current on. What made this the more striking was that Aunt Lucile's
normal mood to-day impressed Mary as rather aggressively sell-contained.
Was it just that Mary had forgotten how straight she sat and how
precisely she moved about? Had she always had that discreet significant
air, as if there were something she could talk about but didn't mean
to--not on any account? Or was there something going on here at home that
awaited--breathlessly awaited--discovery? Whatever it was, when Paula
turned upon her it went, laughably;--only it would have been a pretty
shaky sort of laugh.

It was after lunch that Paula electrified them by suggesting that they
all go together to a matinée. That's an illustration of the power she
had. To each of the three, to Lucile and to Mary as well as to the now
infatuated Rush, she could make a commonplace scheme like that seem an
irresistibly enticing adventure. Lucile recovered her balance first, but
it was not until Nat had fetched the morning paper and they had discussed
their choice of entertainments for two or three minutes that she said of
course she couldn't go. She didn't know what she'd been thinking of. The
number of things imperatively to be done or seen to in preparation for
the party to-night would keep her busy all the afternoon.

Then Mary followed suit. If this was really going to be a party--she
hadn't quite got this idea before--she'd have to spend the afternoon
unpacking and putting her frocks in order or she wouldn't have
anything to wear.

"Well," Paula said comfortably, "until they turn me on like a Victrola at
nine o'clock or so, I've nothing to do with the party except not think
about it." She made this observation at large, then turned on Rush.
"You'll come with me, won't you, and keep me from getting frightened
until tea-time?"

Rush would go--rather!--but he laughed at the word "frightened."

"I'm not joking," she said, and reaching out she covered his hand, which
rested on the cloth, with one of hers.

He flushed instantly at that; then said to the others with slightly
elaborated surprise, "It _is,_ cold, for a fact."

"So is the other one," said Paula. "For that matter, so are my feet. And
getting colder every minute. Come along or we'll be late."

Mary branded this as a bit of rather crude coquetry. It wasn't
conceivable that a professional opera singer of Paula's experience could
look forward with any sort of emotion to the mere singing of a few songs
to a group of familiar friends. It occurred to her, too, that Paula had
calculated on her refusal to go to the matinée as definitely as on Aunt
Lucile's and for a moment she indulged the idea of changing her mind and
going along with them just to frustrate this design. Only, of course, it
wouldn't work that way. She couldn't keep Rush from being taken away from
her by playing the spoil-sport. She couldn't keep him anyhow she
supposed. She made a hasty, rather forlorn retreat to her own room as
soon as the departing pair were safely out of the house.

That room of hers exerted now a rather curious effect upon her mood. It
had been hers ever since her promotion from the nursery and it, like
her brother's adjoining, had been kept unchanged, unoccupied during her
long absence.

The furniture and the decoration of it had been her mother's last
Christmas present. The first Mrs. Wollaston had lived under the influence
of the late Victorian esthetes, and Mary's room looked as if it had been
designed for Elaine the lily maid of Astolat, an effect which was
heightened by a large brown picture in a broad brown frame of Watts' Sir
Galahad. After her mother's death, that winter, Mary added a Botticelli
Madonna, the one with the pomegranate, which she hung by itself on a wall
panel. There was a narrow black oak table under it to carry a Fra
Angelico triptych flanked by two tall candlesticks. It wasn't exactly a
shrine, even if there was a crimson cushion conveniently disposed before
it, and if Mary for a while said her prayers there instead of in the old
childish way at her bedside, and if she genuflected when she passed it,
that was her own affair.

Coming to it now, as to port after storms, with the intention almost
openly avowed to herself of lying down upon the bed and, for an hour or
two, feeling as sorry for herself as she could, she found an appalling
strangeness about its very familiarity that pulled her up short. The
abyss she stared into between herself and the Mary Wollaston whose
image was so sharply evoked by the ridiculously unchanged paraphernalia
of that Mary's life, turned her giddy. Even the face which looked back
at her from the frame of that mirror seemed the other Mary's rather
than her own.

From the doorway she stood, for a moment, staring. Then she managed a
smile (it was the only possible attitude to take) at Sir Galahad, above
the bed. The notion of flinging herself down for a self-pitying revel
upon that bed,--the other Mary's virginal little narrow bed--had become
unthinkable. The thing to do was to stop thinking. Quickly.

She stripped off her suit and blouse, slipped on a pongee kimono that she
got out of her hand-bag, unlocked her trunk and began discharging its
contents all about the room. She covered the chairs with them, the bed,
the narrow table--that had never had anything upon it but that Fra
Angelico triptych and the two candlesticks--the round table with the
reading lamp, the writing desk in the corner, the floor. Then, a little
out of breath, she paused.

Which among two or three possible frocks should she wear for the party
to-night? What sort of party was it going to be anyhow? It was curious,
considering the fact that they had done nothing but sit and talk all the
morning, how vague her ideas about it were. Her father had said
something out in the car about having a few old friends in for dinner.
Paula was going to sing and professed herself frightened by the
prospect. Also she had cited it as the reason for an unusually and
almost strenuously unoccupied day. On the other hand it was keeping Aunt
Lucile distractedly busy.

Was it the chance result of their preoccupation with other things that
she had been given no more intelligible account of it, or was it
something that all three of them, her father, Paula and Aunt Lucile, were
walking round the edge of? The nub of some seriously trivial quarrel? Was
that why Paula was so elaborately disengaged and Aunt Lucile so
portentous? Was it even perhaps why her father had so abruptly fled this
morning without coming into the house?

She treated this surmise kindly. It was something to think about anyhow;
something to sharpen her wits upon, just as a cat stretches her claws in
the nap of the drawing-room rug. She rescued from oblivion half a dozen
remarks heard during the morning, whose significance had gone over her
head, and tentatively fitted them together like bits of a picture puzzle.
She hadn't enough to go on but she believed there was something there.
And when a little later in the afternoon, she heard, along with a knock
on her door, her aunt asking if she might come in, she gave her an
enthusiastic welcome, scooped an armful of things out of a chair and
cleared a sitting space for herself at the foot of the bed.

"Would this blue thing do for to-night?" she asked, "or isn't it enough
of an affair? What sort of party is it anyhow?"

"Goodness knows," said Lucile. "Between your father and Paula I find it
rather upsetting."

Mary had reached out negligently for her cigarette case, lighted one and
letting it droop at a rather impossible angle, supported by the lightest
pressure of her lips so that the smoke crept up over her face into her
lashes and her hair, folded her hands demurely in her lap and waited for
her aunt to go on. She was mischievously half aware of the disturbing
effect of this sort of thing upon Lucile.

"What has there been between them?" Mary asked, when it became clear that
her aunt needed prompting. "Between father and Paula, I mean. Not a row?"

Mary never used language like this except provocatively. It worked on her
aunt as she had meant it to.

"There has been nothing between them," she said, "that requires a rowdy
word like that to express. It has not been even a quarrel. But they have
been for the last day or two, a little--at ..."

"Outs?" Mary suggested.

This had been the word on Lucile's tongue. "At cross purposes," she
amended and paused again. But Mary seeing that she was fairly launched
waited, economically, meanwhile, inhaling all the smoke from her
cigarette. "I suppose after all, it's quite natural," Lucile began,
"that Paula should attract geniuses, since she's rather by way of being
one herself."

Mary took the cigarette in her fingers so that she could speak a little
more crisply than was possible around it. "Who is the genius she's
attracting now? Doesn't father like him? And is he being not asked to the
party? I'm sorry, aunt, I didn't mean to interrupt."

"He is being asked which, it appears, is what Paula objects to; only not
until after dinner. That she insisted upon. Really," she went on, in
response to her niece's perplexed frown, "I shall be much more
intelligible If you'll let me begin at the beginning."

"Please do," said Mary. "Where did Paula find him?"

"I found him," said Miss Wollaston. "Paula discovered him a little later.
I found him on a bench in the park and told him he might come to tune
the drawing-room piano. Paula had him tune her piano instead and spent
what must have been a rather mad day with him over it. He brought round
some songs the next day for her to try and she and Portia Stanton's
husband have been practising them with hardly any intermission since. The
idea was that when they had 'got them up' as they say, the man,--March
his name is, Anthony March, I think,--should be invited round to hear
Paula sing them. Paula insists, absurdly it seems to me, that he never
has heard a note of them himself; that he can't even play them upon the
piano. How he could compose them without playing them on the piano first,
is beyond me. But she is inclined to be a little emotional, I think, over
the whole episode. Quite naturally--even Paula can't deny that--your
father thought he would like to be present when the songs were sung and
it was arranged that it should be this evening."

"She may not have been able to deny that it was natural," Mary observed,
"but I'd bet she didn't like it."

"It's only fair to Paula to say," Miss Wollaston insisted, "that she did
nothing to exhibit a feeling of that sort. But when, at John's
suggestion, I spoke of the possibility of having in the Cravens and the
Blakes,--the Cravens are very musical, you know--and Wallace Hood who
would be really hurt if we left him out, Paula came nearer to being
downright rude than she often allows herself to be. She said among other
things that she didn't propose to have March subjected to a
'suffocating' affair like that. She said she wanted him free to
interrupt as often as he liked and tell them how rotten they were. That
was her phrase. When I observed that Mr. March didn't impress me as the
sort of person who could conceivably wish to be rude as that she said he
could no more remember to be polite when he heard those songs for the
first time than she herself could sing them in corsets. She summed it
up by saying that it wasn't going to be a polite affair and the fewer
polite people there were, hanging about, the better. There was,
naturally, nothing I could say to that."

"I should think not," Mary agreed, exhaling rather explosively an
enormous cloud of smoke. "Poor Aunt Lucile!" Her commiseration didn't
sound more than skin deep.

"The matter rested there," the elder woman went on, "until your father
received Rush's telegram that you were coming to-day. Then he took
matters into his own hands and gave me a list of the people he wanted
asked. There are to be about a dozen besides ourselves at dinner and
perhaps as many more are to come after."

"I can see Paula when you told her that," Mary reflected. "Or did you
make dad tell her himself? Yes, of course you did! Only what I can't
understand is why Paula didn't say, 'All right. Have your party, and I'll
sing if you want me to. Only not--what's his name?--March's songs.' And
have him all to herself, as she wanted him, later. That would have been
mate in one move, I should think."

Then, at the fleeting look she caught in the act of vanishing from her
aunt's face, she cried, "You mean she _did_ say that? And that father
turned to ice, the way he can and--made a point of it? You know it's
serious, if he's done that."

With a vigor meant to compensate for a sad lack of conviction, Miss
Wollaston protested against this chain of unwarranted assumptions. But
she admitted, at last, that her own surmise accorded with that of her
niece. John certainly had said to her at breakfast that he saw no reason
for foregoing the musical feature of the evening simply because an
audience was to be present to hear it. Paula's only comment had been a
dispassionate prediction that it wouldn't work. It wouldn't be fair to
say she sulked; her rather elaborate detachment had been too good-humored
for that. Her statement, at lunch, that she was to be turned on like a
Victrola at half past nine, was a fair sample.

"What's he like, this genius of hers?" Mary wanted to know. "Young and
downy and helpless, I suppose. With a look as if he was just about to
burst into tears. I met one like that last winter." She knew exactly how
to get results out of her aunt.

"He's not in the least like that! If he had been I should never have
brought him home, not even to tune the piano. He's quite a well behaved,
sensible-appearing young man, a little over thirty, I should say. And he
does speak nicely, though I think Paula exaggerates about that."

"Sensible or not, he's fallen wildly in love with her, of course," Mary
observed. "The more so they are the more instantaneously they do it."

But this lead was one Miss Wollaston absolutely declined to follow. "If
that clock's right," she exclaimed, gazing at a little traveling affair
Mary had brought home with her, "I haven't another minute." It was not
right, for it was still keeping New York time, but the diversion served.
"Wallace Hood spoke of coming in to see you about tea-time," she said
from the doorway. "I'm going to be to busy even to stop for a cup, so do
be down if you can."


CHAPTER V

JOHN MAKES A POINT OF IT


Mary was warmly touched by the thought of Wallace's coming to see her in
that special sort of way when he was certain of finding her at dinner an
hour or two later. Her feelings about him were rather mixed but he dated
back to the very earliest of her memories, and his kindly affectionate
attitude toward her had never failed, even during those periods when she
had treated him most detestably. Even as a little girl, she had been
aware of his sentimental attachment to her mother and perhaps in an
instinctive way had resented it, though her actual indictment against
Wallace in those days had always been that he made her naughty; incited
her by his perpetual assumption that she was the angelic little creature
she looked, to one desperate misdemeanor after another, for which her
father usually punished her. Mary had, superficially anyhow, her mother's
looks along with her father's temper.

But for two years after Mrs. Wollaston's death, she and Wallace had been
very good friends. She was grateful to him for treating her like a
grown-up, for talking to her, as he often did, about her mother and how
much she had meant to him. (She owed it, indeed, largely to Wallace that
her memories of this sentimental, romantic, passionless lady with whom in
life she had never been completely in sympathy, were as sweet and
satisfactory as they were.) He had taken infinite pains with her, guiding
her reading and her enjoyment of pictures in the paths of good taste. He
took her to concerts sometimes, too, though at this point her docility
ceased. She wouldn't be musical for anybody. He gave her much-needed
advice in dealing with social matters which her sudden prematurity
forced her to cope with. And with all this went a placidity which had no
part at all in her relations with her father.

She got the idea, during this period, that he meant, when she was a
little older, to ask her to marry him, and she sometimes speculated
whether, if he did, she would. There would be something beautifully
appropriate about it;--like the Professor's Love Story. Usually, though,
she terminated the scene with a tender refusal.

She had long known, of course, how unreal all this was. Wallace had faded
into complete invisibility at the time when she fell in love with Captain
Burch and quarreled with her father about him. She couldn't remember
afterward whether he had even been on the scene or not. But the savor of
their friendship, though mild, was a pleasant one and there was none of
her old acquaintances she'd rather have looked forward to to-day at
tea-time in the drawing-room. She knew exactly what he would be like;
just what they would say to each other. The only doubt in her mind was
whether he'd bring her chocolates or daffodils.

She guessed wrong. It was a box of candied strawberries that he gave her
as soon as their double hand-shake set him free. But nothing else came at
once to the surface to falsify her prevision. She remembered how he liked
his tea and was able to get an affectionate warmth into her voice, that
sounded real though strangely enough it wasn't, in agreeing with him how
like old times this was and how good it seemed to be home. Then came the
joy of having Rush back again, and the war, and the Peace
Conference,--only we weren't going to talk about things like that. And
then Alan Seeger, Rupert Brooke, Conningsby Dawson.

But oddly enough, she felt herself going back to still older times, to
the abominable little girl who had yielded to irresistible desires such
as making faces at him and rubbing the nap of his silk hat the wrong
way. She repressed, vigorously, this lawless vein. She was determined for
this one day to be just as nice as he tried, so hard, to think she was.
But with this resolution occupying her mind the talk presently ran rather
thin, her contribution to it for whole minutes drying up entirely. It was
after a rather blank silence that he said he supposed Paula was lying
down, resting for to-night's performance. His inflection struck Mary as a
little too casual and reminded her that it was his first mention of her
stepmother's name. This roused her attention.

"Oh, Paula's off playing with Rush," she said. "I believe they went to
a matinée."

He exclaimed at that, over Paula's stores of energy and her reckless ways
of spending them. He said she gave him the impression of being absolutely
tireless, superimposing a high speed society existence which John
Wollaston and he, in relays, could hardly keep up with, upon the heavy
routine of work in her studio. He illustrated this with a schedule of her
activities during the last three days. "Oh, yes," he threw in, in
parenthesis, "I'm as much in the family as ever. When your father can't
do escort duty, they call on me." He added in conclusion that he was glad
she had already made a start toward getting acquainted with Rush.

Was this relief, Mary wondered--at learning that she was not at this
moment engaged less domestically somewhere with Anthony March? But she
doubted whether this was a good guess. If he did feel any such relief, it
was not, at all events, from a personal jealousy; for the illuminating
conviction had come over her that Wallace could not possibly be one of
Paula's conquests. A man still capable of cherishing as the most
beautiful event of his life, that sentimental platonic friendship he had
enjoyed with her mother, would be immune against Paula's spells.

She wondered if he wasn't a little afraid of Paula. If he did not, in
his heart, actually dislike her. But if this were true, why did he
willingly devote so many of his hours to squiring her about, substituting
for her husband? (She told herself, as one discovering a great truth,
that a substitute was exactly what Heaven had ordained Wallace Hood to
be.) She kept him going about Paula easily enough, as a sort of obbligato
to these meditations and her name was on Wallace's lips when John
Wollaston came into the room.

"Where is she?" he asked Mary. "I hoped I'd find her resting for
to-night." Evidently he had been up to her room to see. The relief was
plainly legible in his face when he got Mary's answer.

"She and Rush, eh," he said. "I'm glad they've made a start together, but
they ought to be back by now. They drove, didn't they?"

She couldn't inform him as to that and by way of getting him to come to
anchor, offered him his tea.

"Oh, I'll wait for the others," he said. "They can't be much later than
this.--I'm glad she's taken a vacation from those songs," he went on
presently from the fireplace. "She told me last night she'd been working
all day with Novelli over them. Only sent him home about half an hour
before it was time for her to dress for dinner. Do you suppose,"--this to
Wallace--"that they're as wonderful as she thinks they are?"

It was obvious to Mary that Hood's reply was calculated to soothe; his
attitude was indulgent. He talked to Mary about March as just another of
Paula's delightful extravagances. March's indignant refusal, at first, to
tune the Circassian grand, his trick of sitting on the floor under
Paula's piano while she played for him, his forgetting to be paid, though
he had not, in all probability, a cent in his pockets, were exhibited as
whimsicalities, such as Wallace's favorite author, J.M. Barrie, might
have invented. It was just like Paula to take him up as she had done, to
work away for days at his songs, proclaiming the wonder of them all the
while. "We're all hoping, of course," he concluded, "that when she's
finished with them to-night, she'll sing us some of the old familiar
music we really love."

The neat finality of all this, produced, momentarily, the effect of
ranging Mary on the other side, with Paula and her musician. But just at
this point, she lost her character of disinterested spectator, for
Wallace, having put March back in his box and laid him deliberately on
the shelf, abruptly produced, by way of diversion, another piece of goods
altogether.

"I hope Mary's come home to stay," he said to John. "We can't let her go
away again, can we?"

Afterward, she was able to see that it was a natural enough thing for him
to have said. It would never have occurred to him, pleasant, harmless
sentimentalist that he was, that John's second marriage might be a
disturbing factor in his relation with Mary and that the question so
cheerfully asked as an escape from the more serious matter that he had
been talking about, struck straight into a ganglion of nerves.

But at the time, no such excuse for him presented itself. She stared for
a moment, breathless, paled a little and locked her teeth so that they
shouldn't chatter; then, a wave of bright anger relaxed her stiffened
muscles. She did not look at her father but was aware that he was fixedly
not looking at her.

"I don't know whether I am going to stay or not," she said casually
enough. "There isn't any particular reason why I should, unless I can
find something to do. You haven't a job for me, have you?"

"A job?" Wallace gasped.

"In your office," she explained. "Filing and typing, or running the
mimeograph. It seems to be a choice between something like that
and--millinery."

"That's an extravagant idea," her father said, trying for, but not quite
able to manage, a tone that matched hers. "Good lord, Wallace, don't sit
there looking as if you thought she meant it!"

"You do look perfectly--consternated," she said with a pretty good laugh.
"Never mind; I shan't do anything outrageous for a week or two. Oh, here
they come. Will you ring, dad? I want some more hot water."

Rush came into the drawing-room alone, Paula having lingered a moment,
probably before the mirror in the hall. Mere professional instinct for
arranging entrances for herself, Mary surmised this to be. And she may
have been right for Paula was not one of those women who are forever
making minute readjustments before a glass. But when she came in, just
after Wallace Hood had accomplished his welcome of the returned soldier,
it was hard to believe that she was concerned about the effect she
produced upon the group about the tea-table. She didn't, indeed,
altogether join it, gave them a collective nod of greeting with a faint
but special smile for her husband on the end of it and then deliberately
seated herself with a "No, don't bother; this is all right," at the end
of the little sofa that stood in the curve of the grand piano, rather in
the background.

When Mary asked her how she wanted her tea, she said she didn't think
she'd have any; and certainly no cakes. No, not even one of Wallace's
candied strawberries. There was an exchange of glances between her and
Rush over this.

"They have been having tea by themselves, those two," Mary remarked.

"No," said Rush, "not what you could call tea."

Paula smiled vaguely but didn't throw the ball back, did not happen, it
appeared, to care to talk about anything. Presently the chatter among the
rest of them renewed itself.

Only it would have amused an invisible spectator to note how those three
Wollastons, blonde, dolichocephalic, high-strung, magnetically
susceptible, responded, as strips of gold-leaf to the static electricity
about a well rubbed amber rod, to the influence that emanated from that
silent figure on the sofa. Rush, in and out of his chair a dozen times,
to flip the ash from his cigarette, to light one for Mary, to hand the
strawberries round again, was tugging at his moorings like a captive
balloon. When he answered a question it was with the air of interrupting
an inaudible tune he was whistling. John still planted before the
fireplace, taking, automatically, a small part in the talk just as he
went through the minimum of business with his tea, seemed capable of only
one significant action, which he repeated at short, irregular intervals.
He turned his head enough to enable him to see into a mirror which gave
him a reflection of his wife's face; then turned away again, like one
waiting for some sort of reassurance and not getting it. Mary, muscularly
relaxed, indeed, drooping over the tea-table, had visible about her,
nevertheless, a sort of supernormal alertness. Every time her father
looked into the mirror she glanced at him, and she rippled, like still
water, at all of her brother's sudden movements.

As for Wallace Hood, one look at him sitting there, as unresponsive to
the spell as the cup from which he was sipping its third replenishment of
tea, would have explained his domestication in that household;--the
necessity, in fact, for domesticating among them some one who was always
buoyantly upon the surface, whose talk, in comfortably rounded sentences,
flowed along with a mild approximation to wit, whose sentiments were
never barbed with passion;--who was, to sum him up in one embracing
word, appropriate.

Mary, in addition to feeling repentant over her outbreak just before
Paula came in, experienced a sort of gratitude to him for being able to
sit squarely facing the sofa, untroubled by the absent thoughtful face
and the figure a little languorously disposed that confronted him. His
bright generalities were addressed to her as much as to the rest of them;
his smile asked the same response from her and nothing more.

Nothing short of an explosion that shattered all their surfaces at once
could have got a single vibration out of him. By that same token, when
the explosion did occur, he was the most helpless person there, the only
one of them who could really be called panic-stricken.

John had, at last, crossed the room and seated himself beside his wife.
He spoke to her in a low voice but her full-throated reply was audible
everywhere in the room.

"No, I'm not tired and I really don't want any tea. I've gone slack on
purpose because that's how I want to be till nine o'clock. I've just
eaten an enormous oyster stew with Rush. That's what we waited for."

John frowned. "My dear, you'll have ruined your appetite for dinner."

"I hope so," she said, "because I'm not to have any."

At that, from the other two men, there began an expostulatory--"No
dinner!" "You don't mean ...!" but it was silenced by John's
crisp--"You're planning not to come down to dinner, then?"

"Oh, I'll come down," said Paula, "and I'll sit. But I don't mean to eat
anything. Unless you think that will be too much like a--what is
it?--skeleton at the feast."

"I think it would seem somewhat-exaggerated," he said.

"Well," Paula retorted, drawing the rest of the room into it again just
as Wallace was making a gallant effort to start a subsidiary conversation
to serve as a screen, "that's because you haven't heard those songs. If
there's a singer in the world who'd dare--cut loose with them right after
eating the sort of dinner Lucile will have to-night for Mary and Rush,
I'd like to see him try it."

"I didn't mean to imply that they were not difficult. I dare say they are
all but impossible. But it does seem to me that you are taking the
occasion of singing them--a little too--emotionally."

The tone he was trying for was meant to have nothing in it--for other
ears than hers, at least, beyond mere good-humored remonstrance. But her
reply tore all pretense aside. She let him have it straight.

"You're the one who's being emotional about it," she said.

The blood leaped into his face at that but he did not reply.

"Look here, John," she went on--and her big voice swept away the polite
convention that the others were not listening, "I've told you that this
won't work and you must see now that that's true. There's still time to
call up March and tell him that it's to-morrow instead of to-day. Because
of Rush and Mary. Won't you let me do that?"

It is just possible that if he had been alone with her, he might have
acknowledged the issue, might have admitted that this new composer whose
works she had been so absorbed in, frightened him, figured in his mind as
the present manifestation of a force that was trying to take her away
from him. And having let her see that, he could safely enough have said,
"Have your own way about it. You know what will work and what won't. Only
make it as easy for me as you can." But in the presence of his
children--it was they, rather than Wallace, that he minded--he was at
once evasive and domineering.

"I thought we'd already disposed of that suggestion," he said. "If the
situation is as it has been made to appear to me there is not the
smallest reason why March should be put off; why Mary and Rush and the
friends we have asked in to meet them, shouldn't be permitted to hear his
songs; or why I shouldn't myself. I think we'll consider that settled."

Paula rose all in one piece. "Very well," she said--to the audience, "it
is settled. Also it's settled that I shall not come down to dinner. As
for what people will think, I'll leave that to you. You can make any
explanation you like. But I shall sing those songs to March--and for
him--for all they're worth. I don't care who else is there or whether
they like it or not.--A lot of patronizing amateurs! Bring them up to the
music room about nine o'clock, if you like. I'll be there."

She left behind her, in that Victorian drawing-room, a silence
that tingled.


CHAPTER VI

STRINGENDO


A crisis of this sort was just what the Wollastons needed to tune them
up. The four of them, for Lucile had to be counted in, met the
enemy--which is to say their arriving guests--with an unbroken front.
They explained Paula's non-appearance with good-humored unconcern. She
was afraid if she sat down to Lucile's dinner that she would forget her
duty and eat it and find herself fatally incapacitated for cutting loose
on Mr. March's songs afterward. They must be rather remarkable songs that
required to be approached in so Spartan a manner. Well, Paula assured us
that they were. The family declined all responsibility in the matter, not
having themselves heard a note of them, but if you wanted to you might
ask Mr. Novelli, over there. He'd been working over them with Paula for
days. As for the composer, he was as much a mystery as his songs. He
wasn't coming to the dinner but was expected to appear from somewhere
afterward.

Novelli, as it happened, was not very productive of information. Half an
hour before the dinner, his wife had telephoned Lucile to ask if he
might bring a guest of his own, a certain Monsieur LaChaise, who was one
of the conductors at the Metropolitan and was to have the direction of
the summer opera out here at Ravinia this year. Portia added with the
falsely deprecatory air of a mother apologizing for a child's prank,
that Pietro had in fact, already invited him to the dinner and had only
just informed her of the fact. Lucile had assured her, of course, that
this addition to the company would cause not the slightest
inconvenience, served on the contrary to bring it up to the number that
had originally been counted upon.

When LaChaise arrived the discovery that he talked no English at all
beyond a few rudimentary phrases, a fact which normally would have seemed
calamitous, was now merely treated as an added feature of the evening. He
and Novelli were in the midst of an animated discussion when they
arrived. They stuck together in the drawing-room as if locked in the same
pair of handcuffs and seating arrangements were hastily revised so that
they might go on talking in untroubled mutual absorption straight through
the dinner. Rush being placed handily by, where he could come to the
rescue in case of need.

It was only the extremest surface of Mary sitting at the head of the
table in Paula's place (which once had been her own) that was engaged
with her unforeseen duties as hostess. And yet in a way, the whole of her
consciousness had been drawn to the surface. The strong interior
excitement that had been burning in her during all this day of her
home-coming, the rising conviction that life at home might turn out to be
something very different indeed from the thing that it had, down in New
York, looked like, the blend of foreboding with anticipation that
accompanied it, and finally a sense of the imminence of something
important, not quite to be accounted for by the quarrel between her
father and his wife,--all this emotional reaction found its outlet during
the long dinner in a quite unusual vivacity. Her sphere of influence
spread down the table until it embraced a full half the length of it on
both sides and those just beyond the reach of it, aware that they were
missing something, listened but distractedly to the talk of their more
remote partners. And while she was doing all this she managed with her
left hand, as it were, to, keep going a vivid little confidential
flirtation with the Stannard boy, Graham, a neighbor and a contemporary
of hers just back from service on a destroyer.

The thing that stimulated her to all this was a consciousness of her
father's intense awareness of her. She had been deliberately evasive of
him since his quarrel with Paula. What he wanted of her she knew as well
as if he had expressed the need of it in so many words. He had turned to
her for it as soon as Paula had gone up-stairs and Rush had accompanied
the thoroughly demoralized Wallace into the hall. She had found a certain
hard satisfaction in denying it to him, in not nestling up into the arms
that happened, for the moment, to be vacant of Paula. This was so
imperative an instinct that she had not even reproached herself for it,
though she supposed she would later.

The sense that something in some way or other decisive was going to
happen to-night, quickened her pulse as she mounted, along with the last
of their guests to the music room, in response to Paula's message that
Mr. March had come and that the "rehearsal" was about to begin. She
looked about eagerly for a man who might be March but could not discover
him anywhere. Was he, perhaps, she absurdly wondered, sitting once more
under the piano?

Novelli drooped over the keyboard. LaChaise was half hidden in a deep
chair in one of the dormers. Paula, her back to the little audience,
stood talking to Novelli. Mary allowed herself a faint smile over the
expression in those faces that Paula wouldn't look at. The half-concealed
impatience, the anticipatory boredom, showed through so unfaltering a
determination to do and express to the end the precisely correct thing.
Even her father's anger looked out through a mask like that.

LaChaise, from his corner said something in French that Mary didn't
catch. Novelli straightened his back. And in that instant before a note
was sounded, Mary's excitement mounted higher. The absorption of those
three musicians, the intensity of their preoccupation, told her that the
something she had expected was going to happen--now. But she did not know
that it was going to happen to her.

Long ago the family had acquiesced in Mary's assertion that she was not
in the least musical and in her stubborn refusal to "take" anything, even
the most elementary course of lessons on the piano. She had been allowed
to grow up in an ignorance almost unique in these days, of the whole
mystery of musical notation and phraseology, an ignorance that might be
reckoned the equivalent of a special talent.

Later, indeed, she had made the discovery--or what would have been a
discovery if she had fully admitted it to herself--that music sometimes
exerted a special power over her emotions. Whether it was a certain sort
of music that created the mood or a certain sort of mood that was capable
of responding to music, she had never seriously inquired. The critical
jargon of the wiseacres always irritated her. She supposed it meant
something because they seemed intelligible to each other but she rather
enjoyed indulging the presumption that it did not. When she went to
concerts, she liked to go alone, or at least to be let alone, to sit back
passively and allow the variegated tissue of sound to envelop her spirit
as it would. If it bored her, as it frequently did, there was no harm
done, no pretense to make. If, as more rarely happened, it stole somehow
into complete possession, floated her away upon strange voyages, she was
at least immune from analysis and inquisition afterward.

So it was with no critical expectancy that she listened when Novelli
began to play; indeed, in the active sense, she did not listen at all.
She forgot to be amused by the composed faces about her; she forgot,
presently, whose music it was and whose voice she heard. What she felt
was a disentanglement, an emergence into more open, wider spaces,--cold
ethereal spaces. It seemed, though, that it was her own mood the music
fitted into, rather than the other way about.

She heard the talk that followed the polite rustle of applause at the
first intermission, without being irritated by it, without even
listening to what it meant, though here and there a phrase registered
itself upon her ear. Henry Craven's "Very modern, of course. No tonality
at all, not a cadence in it," and Charlotte Avery's "No form either. And
hardly to be called a song. A tone poem, really, with a part written
into it for the voice."

The music began again, and now was given ungrudging credit for the
recreation of her mood. Only its admitted beauty created a longing which
it did not serve to satisfy. The cold open sky with its mysterious
interstellar spaces, the flow of the black devouring clouds, the
reemergence of the immortal Pleiades, remote, inhuman, unaware, brought
no tranquillity but only a forlorn human loneliness.

On that note it ended, but Paula, with a nod to Novelli, directed him to
go straight on to the love song. The two do not form a sequence in the
poem; indeed the love song occurs very early in it and the Burial of the
Stars comes afterward, nearly at the end. But I think, as March did, that
Paula's instinct was sound in using the unearthly Schubert-like beauty of
the Burial of the Stars as a prelude to the purely human passion of the
love song.

It is, I suppose, one of the supreme lyric expressions in the English
language of the passion of love. Furthermore, Whitman's free unmetered
swing, the glorious length of his stride, fell in with March's rhythmic
idiom as though they had been born under the same star.

The result is one of those happy marriages so rare as to be almost
unique, in which the emotional power of a great song is enhanced by its
musical setting, and where, conversely, a great piece of lyric music
gains rather than loses by its words.

March did not use the whole poem. His setting begins on the line "Low
hangs the moon," and ends with the "Hither, my love! Here I am! Here!"
Why he elected not to go on with it, I don't know. Possibly, because his
own impulse was spent before Whitman's; possibly, because he did not wish
to impose the darker melancholy of the latter stanzas upon the clear
ecstasy of that last call.

It lost something, of course, from the inadequacy of the piano
transcription, for it was conceived and written orchestrally. Paula, too,
has given finer performances of it;--indeed, she sang it better a little
later that same evening. But spurred as she was by the knowledge that the
composer was listening to it and by her determination to win a victory
for it, she flung herself into it with all the power and passion she had.

I doubt whether any other auditor ever is more completely overwhelmed
by it than Mary was. It was so utterly her own, the cry of it so verily
the unacknowledged cry of her own heart, that the successive stanzas
buried themselves in it like unerring arrows. The intensity of its
climax was more poignant, more nearly intolerable, than anything in all
the music she had ever heard. Limp, wet, breathless, trembling all
over, she sat for a matter of minutes after that last ineffable
yearning note had died away.

There was a certain variety in the emotions of the rest of the audience,
but they met on common ground in the feeling of not knowing where to look
or what to say. Their individualities submerged in a great crowd, they
might--most of them--have allowed themselves to be carried away,
especially if they'd come in the expectation--founded on the experience
of other audiences--that they would be carried away. But to sit like
this, all very much aware of each other while a woman they knew, the
wife of a man they had long known, proclaimed a naked passion like that,
was simply painful. What they didn't know you see--there was no program
to tell them--was whether the thing was inspired or merely dreadful, and
when it was over they sat in stony despair, waiting, like the children of
Israel, for a sign.

It was LaChaise who broke the spell by crossing the room and
unceremoniously displacing Novelli at the piano. He turned back to the
beginning of the score and began reading it, at first silently, then
humming unintelligible orchestral parts as he was able to infer them from
the transcription; finally with noisy outbursts upon the piano, to which
din Novelli contributed with one hand reached down over the conductor's
shoulder. Paula standing in the curve of the instrument, her elbows on
the lid, followed them from her copy of the score. It got to the audience
that an alert attitude of attention was no longer required of them. That
in fact, so far as the three musicians were concerned, nothing was
required of them, not even silence. As an audience they ceased to exist.
They were dissolved once more into their social elements and began a
little feverishly to talk.

The realization broke over Mary with the intensity of panic that some one
of them might speak to her. She rose blindly and slipped out into the
hall, but even there she did not feel safe. Some of them, any of them,
might follow her. She wanted to hide. There was a small room adjoining
the studio--it had been the nurse's bedroom when the other had been the
nursery--and its door now stood ajar. She slipped within and closed it
very softly behind her.

Here in the grateful half-dark she was safe enough although the door into
the studio was also part way open. There was nothing in here but
lumber--an old settee, a bookcase full of discarded volumes from the
library and an overflow of Paula's music. No one would think of looking
for her in here.

But as she turned her back upon the door that she had just closed, she
saw that some one was here, a man in khaki sitting on the edge of that
old settee, leaning forward a little, his hands clasped between his
knees. She had come in so quietly he had not heard her.

It seemed to her afterward that she must have had two simultaneous and
contradictory ideas as to who he was. She knew,--she must have known,
instantly--that he was Anthony March, but his uniform suggested Rush and
drew her over toward him just as though she had actually believed him to
be her brother. And then as he became aware of her and glanced up, Paula
in the other room began singing the last song over again, her great broad
voice submerging the buzz of talk like the tide rushing in over a flat.
Without a word Mary dropped down beside him on the settee.

In the middle of a phrase the music stopped.

"A vous le tour!" they heard LaChaise say to Novelli. "Je ne suis pas
assez pianiste. Maintenant! Recommencons, n'est-ce-pas?"

The song resumed. March's frame stiffened.

"Oh night! do I not see my love fluttering out among the
  breakers?
 What is that little black thing I see there in the white?"

"Now then," March whispered. "Quicker! My God, can't they pick it up?"
Like an echo came LaChaise's "Plus vite! _Stringendo_, jusque au bout!"
and with a gasp the composer greeted the quickened tempo. Then as the
song swept to its first tempestuous climax he clutched Mary's arm.
"That's it," he cried. "Can't you see that's it?"

"Loud! loud! loud!
 Loud I call to you, my love!
 High and clear I shoot my voice over the waves,
 Surely you must know who is here, is here,
 You must know who I am, my love."

He let go her arm. The song went on.

"Low-hanging moon!
 What is that dusky spot in your brown yellow?
 O it is the shape, the shape of my mate!
 Oh moon, do not keep me from her any longer."

From there, without interruption it swept along to the end.

It was during the ecstatic pianissimo just before the final section
that their hands clasped. Which of them first sought the contact
neither of them knew but they sat linked like that, tingling,
breathless during the lines:--

"... somewhere I believe I heard my mate responding to me,
 So faint I must be still, be still to listen,
 But not altogether still, for then she might not come immediately to
   me."

On the last "Hither, my love! Here I am! Here!" the clasp tightened,
convulsively. But it was not until the circuit was broken that the spark
really leaped across the gap.

There was no applause in the other room when the song ended for the
second time, but it won a clear half minute of breathless silence before
the eddies of talk began again. During that tight-stretched moment the
pair upon the settee, their hands just unclasped, sat motionless, fully
aware of each other for the first time, almost unendurably aware,
thrilling with the just-arrived sense of the amazing intimacy of the
experience they had shared. Neither of them was innocent but neither had
ever known so complete a fusion of his identity with another as this
which the spell of his music had produced.

They sat side by side but not very close, not so close that there was
contact anywhere between them and neither made any move to resume it.
Both were trembling uncontrollably and each knew that the other was.

The hum of talk in the other room rose louder and finally became
articulate in Charlotte Avery's crisp, "Good night, my dear Paula,
we've had a most interesting evening. I shall hope to hear more of
your discovery. And see him too sometime if you make up your mind to
exhibit him."

March started from his seat at that. "Don't make any noise," Mary
whispered, rising too, and laying a detaining hand on him. "Nobody will
come in here. They'll all go now. We must wait."

He obeyed tractably enough, only turned toward her now and gazed at her
with undissimulated intensity; not, though, as if speculating who she
might be, rather as if wondering whether she were really there.

"Don't you want them to find you, either?" he asked.

"N-not after that," she stammered; and added instantly, "We
mustn't talk."

So silent once more, they waited while the late audience defiled in
irregular, slow moving groups down the hall toward the stairs. Mary
distinguished her father's voice, her brother's, her aunt's, all taking
valiantly just the right social note. They were covering the retreat in
good order. And she heard Portia Stanton taking her husband home. But the
music room was not yet deserted. There were sounds of relaxation in
there, the striking of a match, the sound of a heavy body--that of
LaChaise, probably--dropping into an easy chair.

"And now," Mary heard him say to Paula--"Now fetch out your composer.
Where have you had him hidden all this while?"

"He's in there. I was just waiting until they were really gone. I'll get
him now, though. No, sit still; I'd rather, myself."

March, however, didn't move; not even when they could hear Paula coming
toward the door. He stood gazing thoughtfully at Mary, his eyes luminous
in the dark. It occurred to her that the conversation in the other room
had been in French and that he had not understood it.

"Oh, go--quickly!" she had just time to breathe. Then she crowded back,
close against the partition wall. The door opened that way, so that when
Paula flung it wide it screened her a little.

The singer stood there, a golden glowing thing in the light she had
brought in with her. "Where are you?" she asked. Then she came up to
March and took him by the arms. "Was it good?" she asked. "Was it--a
little--as you meant it to sound?"

When he did not speak, she laughed,--a rich low laugh that had a hint of
tears in it, pulled him up to her and kissed his cheek. "You don't have
to answer, my dear," she said. "Come in and hear what LaChaise has got to
say about it."

Without effort, irresistibly, she swept him along with her into the
music room.

Mary, when they were gone, let herself out by the other door as softly as
she had come in. She fled down one flight of the stairs and a moment
later had locked the door of her own room behind her. She switched on the
light, gave a ragged laugh at Sir Galahad; then lay down, just as she
was, on the little white bed, her face in the pillow, and cried.


CHAPTER VII

NO THOROUGHFARE


It was hours later, well along toward one o'clock in the morning when
Rush coming into his room saw a light under the door communicating with
his sister's and, knocking, was told he might come in.

He found her in bed for the night, reclining against a stack of pillows
as if she had been reading, but from the way she blinked at the softened
light from the lamp on her night table, it appeared that she had switched
it on only when she heard him coming. She might have been crying though
she looked composed enough now;--symmetrically composed, indeed, a braid
over each shoulder, her hands folded, her legs straight down the middle
of the bed making a single ridge that terminated in a little peak where
her feet stuck up (the way heroines lie, it occurred to Rush, in the last
act of grand operas, when they are dead) and this effect was enhanced by
the new-laundered whiteness of the sheet, neatly folded back over the
blankets and the untumbled pillows.

"You always look so nice and clean," he told her, and, forbearing to sit
on the edge of the bed as a pat of her hand invited him to, pulled up a
chair instead. It was going to be a real talk, not just a casual
good-night chat.

"We were wondering what had become of you," he said. "Poor Graham
was worried."

"Graham!" But she did not follow that up. "I decided we'd had temperament
enough for one evening," she explained in a matter-of-fact tone, "so when
I saw I was going to explode I came away quietly and did it in here. By
the time it was over I thought I might as well go to bed."

"It doesn't look as if you'd exploded very violently," he observed.

"Oh, I've cleared away the ruins," she said. "I hate reminders of a
mess."

It was like her exquisiteness to do that and it tightened his throat to
think about it. He'd have liked to make sure what the cause of the
explosion had been, but thought he'd better wait a while for that. All he
ventured in the way of sympathetic approbation was to reach out and pat
the ridge that extended down the middle of the bed. "It certainly has
been one devil of an evening," he said.

"I suppose it has," she agreed, thoughtfully. Then, noticing that this
had rather thrown him off his stride, she went on, "Tell me all that's
been happening since I ran away. How did Paula act when it was over?"

"I haven't seen her," he said. "She never came down at all. Of course it
must have been--well, in a way, a devil of an evening for her, too.
Though I can't believe our being there cramped her style very much in
singing those songs. If it did, I'd hate to think what she would have
done if we hadn't been. I hope March liked his own stuff. He was there
all the while, you know. She must have had him tucked away in that little
old room of Annie's that opened off the nursery. Somewhere anyhow,
because long after every one else had gone, he came down-stairs with the
Frenchman. I got one surprise just then all right. He's a private
soldier, did you know that? Just a plain doughboy."

"Overseas?" Mary asked.

"As far as Bordeaux, with the Eighty-sixth. Saxaphone player with one of
the artillery bands. In a way I'm rather glad of it. That that's what he
turns out to be, I mean."

"Why?" Mary made the word rather crisply.

"Oh, well," Rush explained uncomfortably, "you know what it had begun to
look like. Paula quarreling with father about him and not going down to
dinner; and--cutting loose like that over his music. But of course there
couldn't be anything of that sort--with a chap like that."

"What is the lowest military rank," Mary inquired, "that you think Paula
could fall in love with?"

The satirical import of her question was not lost upon him but he held
his ground. "It may sound snobbish but it's true just the same," he
insisted. "A doughboy's a doughboy, and Paula wouldn't get mixed up with
one--any more than you would."

There was a silence after that.

"His music didn't sound to me like doughboy music," Mary observed at
last. "Nor his going to Walt Whitman to get the words."

"Was that Walt Whitman? It sounded to me as if he was making it up as he
went along." He had the grace to grin at himself over that admission,
however. "Oh, well," he concluded, "Paula's all right anyhow. I think
she's--wonderful, myself. Only poor old dad! He is a peach, Mary. It's
funny how differently I remember him. He acted like one real sport
to-night."

"Afterward, you mean." Mary, it seemed, would not have characterized her
father's behavior earlier in the evening in just that way. "Tell me all
about it. Only reach me a cigarette first."

He obeyed the latter injunction with an air of protest. "It's the only
thing you do that I wish you didn't," he said.

"Why? Do you think it's bad for me?"

He wouldn't commit himself by answering that. The retort it offered her
was obvious. "It doesn't seem like you," he explained.

"Very well," she said, taking a light from his match, "then I shall go on
just to keep you reminded that I'm not plaster of Paris. I like to have
somebody around who doesn't think that."

"Father doesn't," Rush asserted, and got so eager a look of inquiry from
her that he regretted having nothing very substantial to satisfy it
with. "Oh, down there in the hall," he said, "after everybody but March
and the Frenchman had gone. Aunt Lucile began fussing about you. She was
rather up in the air, anyway. She'd done the nonchalant, all
right,--overdone it a bit in fact--as long as there was any one around
to play up to. But when we had got rid of the Novellis--they were the
last--she did a balloon ascension. She had a fit or two in general and
then came round to wondering about you. Wanted to know when we'd last
seen you--what _could_ have happened to you,--that sort of thing. I'd
been having a little talk with Graham so I supposed I knew. But of
course I said nothing about that."

He was looking rather fixedly away from her and so missed her frown of
incomprehension. "Well, but father?" she asked.

It had been coming over him that what his father had said was not just
what he wanted to report to Mary. Not while she felt about him as she
had confessed, down there in New York, she did. But he had let himself
in for it.

"Why, it wasn't much," he said; "just that nothing could have happened to
you; that you wouldn't 'fall off anything and break.' What you said about
plaster of Paris made me think of it. He was only trying to get Aunt
Lucile quieted down."

"While he had Paula on his mind, he didn't want to be bothered about me.
That's natural enough, of course." Her dry brittle tone was anything but
reassuring. Still without looking at her, he hurried on.

"Well, it _is_ natural that he should be worried about Paula. I know
how I'd feel about a thing like that. It was rather weird while we
waited after Aunt Lucile went up to bed for those two to come down.
Old Nat was fussing around the drawing-room, shutting up and putting
things to rights. Dad sent him to bed, too, told him we'd do the
locking up ourselves. I got the idea that he was expecting Paula to
come sailing down, with March, you know, and perhaps didn't want any
one around. So I made a bluff of going to bed myself. But he told me
to stick; said we'd settle down and have a smoke presently. I don't
know how long it was before we heard LaChaise and March coming but it
seemed a deuce of a while.

"Dad was right on the job then, calm as a May morning. He introduced
March and me and said something polite about his music, never a word
about his having been hiding all the evening.

"Then LaChaise spoke to dad in French. Said there was some business he
wanted to talk with him about and that he'd like an appointment. I wasn't
sure that dad quite got him so I crashed in and interpreted.

"Dad reached out and took hold of me, as if he was sort of glad that I
was there, and told me to tell Mr. LaChaise that we had plenty of time
right now, and if there was anything to discuss the sooner we got at it,
the better.

"I handed that on in French--I tried not to lose any of the kick out of
it--and while I was doing that March made a move to go.

"Dad told him not to. I wish you could have been there. I remember he
said after inviting him to stay, 'I imagine you are as much concerned in
this as any one.' It didn't faze March though. He said that he didn't
believe that what Mr. LaChaise had to say concerned him. Then he made a
stiff little bow for good night and went off down the hall to get his
hat. Oh, that wasn't like a doughboy, I'll admit. I went to the door
with him and we made a little conversation there for a minute or two just
to--take off the edge. That's when I found out where he'd been.

"Father had taken LaChaise into the drawing-room when I got back but I
don't believe either of them had said three words. They were waiting for
me. Dad led off by asking what he thought of March, and LaChaise told
him, though you could see that wasn't what was on his mind. He said March
had a very strong and original talent and that he believed he had operas
in him. There was one about finished that he was going to look at
to-morrow. Then he pulled up short and said it was Paula he wanted to
talk about.

"Dad caught that all right without waiting for me to translate it. What
he wanted to get at, right at the jump off, was whether Paula knew
LaChaise had come down to talk about her. Was he to consider Mr.
LaChaise her emissary? I took a chance on _émissaire_ for that and it
worked all right.

"Well, the Frenchman said, as cool as you please, that he was. Said he
wouldn't have ventured to intrude otherwise:--and dad froze to ice right
there. But LaChaise went on and spoke his piece just the same. He said
he'd come to-night to verify the enthusiastic reports he had heard of her
singing but that she had outdone them all. He said the voice itself was
unusual, of great power and of beautiful quality, adequate in range for
anything that could be expected of her. But he said that was only the
beginning of it. The important things were that she was a real musician
in the first place and a woman with real passions in the second.

"I didn't know whether to translate that to dad or to shut the Frenchman
up myself right there. I would have liked to take a punch at him. But, of
course, you're nothing but a part of the machinery when you are
interpreting, so I handed it on, without looking at dad. All he said was,
'We'll get to the point, if you please, Monsieur.'

"LaChaise understood that without waiting for me. He said he had had no
hesitation in offering Paula a contract to sing the leading dramatic
soprano rôles at Ravinia this summer and that he had told her if it
worked anywhere near as well as he expected it to there was no doubt of
her getting a good Metropolitan engagement next season. He finished up by
saying he had had to ask her to make a decision as soon as possible
because he was at that moment negotiating with some one else who couldn't
be put off very long.

"Dad asked then whether Paula had given him an answer to-night. LaChaise
told him she had accepted--subject to his obtaining dad's consent. Then
he finished up with a full-dress bow. 'That is the point you have asked
me to come to, Monsieur,' he said.

"Dad never said a word for a minute. You could see it must have been
ghastly for him. I guess LaChaise must have seen it himself, for he went
on and tried to soften it down a bit. Said he didn't want to seem to
_brusqué_ the affair. All he wanted to ask dad to-night was that he
should agree to consider the matter, bearing in mind that a real artist
like _madame_, his wife, couldn't be kept shut up in a brass tower
indefinitely.

"Dad cut him off rather short on that. He said that from a legal or
business point of view, which was all that could possibly concern
LaChaise, his consent wasn't necessary. If his wife signed a contract he
would put no obstacles in the way of her fulfilling it. Beyond that he
had obviously nothing to say.

"Well, that was about all. They both put on all the trimmings saying good
night to each other and LaChaise thanked me very handsomely for
interpreting. I chucked him into his overcoat and let him out the front
door.--And bolted it after him, you bet! Lord, but I hated to go back to
dad after that.

"I needn't have worried though. When we sat down for our smoke in the
library, it was exactly as if nothing had happened. I'd have been tearing
my hair but old dad.... He certainly is a peach."

Rush paused there for some comment from her and when she made none,
looked around at her. Her hands were lightly clasped across her breast,
her eyelids nearly closed. Save for her barely perceptible breathing, she
lay dead still.

"Have I talked you to sleep?" he asked.

"No," she said, "I was thinking what a mixed-up thing life is. The way
you can't help liking and admiring the people you wish you could hate and
hating and hurting the ones you love." Then her eyes came open with a
smile and she held out a hand toward him. "You don't have to answer that.
It's the sort of silly thing people say when they have been drinking gin.
What I was really wondering was whether there will be anything about Mr.
March's opera in that contract Paula signs with LaChaise?"

This startled him. "I never thought of that," he answered. "Do you
suppose that's it? Oh, it can't be! She wouldn't chuck dad for that
doughboy piano tuner. Not Paula!"

"Oh, no," said Mary. "She wouldn't do that. It wouldn't look to her like
that, anyhow. She's got enough, don't you see, for everybody; for dad
and--and the doughboy as well. Father wouldn't have any less, if he could
just make up his mind that he didn't have to have it all. And as for the
other, why, it might be the greatest thing that could possibly happen to
him;--being in love with Paula and writing operas for her and having her
sing them the way she sang those songs to-night. I suppose that's what a
genius needs. And you couldn't blame her exactly. At least there always
have been people like that and the world hasn't blamed them--no matter
how moral it pretends to be. It's the other sort of people, the ones who
won't take anything unless they can have it all and who can't give
anything unless they can give it all--those that haven't but one thing to
give--that are--no good."

He didn't more than half understand her, which was fortunate, since he
was rather horrified as it was. He put it down broadly as the same sort
of nervous crisis that he had encountered in New York, a sort of
hypersensitiveness due to the strain of war work--the thing he had amused
her by speaking of as shell-shock.

"I think perhaps I know what has upset you to-night," he said
uncomfortably. "At least Graham told me about it."

She looked at him with a puzzled frown. It was the third time that he had
brought up the Stannard boy's name. What in the world...?

"He's terribly distressed about it," Rush went on. In his embarrassment
he wasn't looking at her and she composed her face. "He didn't
mean to shock you or--or offend you. He says he gave you reason enough
to be offended, but only because you didn't understand. He says he
has always--cared for you a lot. He said he thought you were the
most--well, about the most perfect thing in the world. Only to-night
he said he got carried off his feet and went further than he had any
right to. And he simply can't bear to have you think that he meant
anything--disrespectful. He felt he had to apologize to you before he
went home, but you didn't come down so finally he told me about it and
made me promise that I'd tell you to-night. Of course, I don't know what
he did," Rush concluded, "but I can tell you this. Graham Stannard's a
white man; they don't make them whiter than that."

Her reply, although it was unequivocally to the effect that it was all
right--Graham needn't worry--failed, altogether, to reassure him. Was
this, after all, he wondered, what she had exploded about? She prevented
further inquiry, however, by an abrupt change of the subject, demanding
to be told what it was that he and his father, all these hours, had been
talking about.

He took up the topic with unforced enthusiasm. He had been surprised and
deeply touched over the discovery that his father did not require to be
argued out of the project either to send him back to Harvard or to start
him in at the bottom in Martin Whitney's bank. "If he'd just been
through it all himself, he couldn't have understood any better how I
feel about it."

"Did you tell him about the farm?" Mary asked.

This was an idea of Graham's which she and Rush had been developing with
him during the half hour in the drawing-room before they had gone down to
dinner. Young Stannard, during his two years on a destroyer, had
conceived an extraordinary longing for Mother Earth, and had filled in
his dream in tolerably complete detail. What he wanted was an out-of-door
life which should not altogether deprive him of the pleasures of an urban
existence; and he accomplished this paradox by premising a farm within
convenient motoring distance of Chicago, on one of the hard roads.
Somewhere in the dairy belt, out Elgin way perhaps. You could have
wonderful week-end house parties in a place like that, even in winter,
with skiing and skating for amusements, and in summer it would be simply
gorgeous. And, of course, one could always run into town for the night if
there was anything particular to come for.

Mary had volunteered to keep house for them and they had talked a lot of
amusing nonsense as to what her duties should be. Graham, too, had a kid
sister, only seventeen, who fitted admirably into the picture. She loved
the country, simply lived in riding breeches and rode like a man--a sight
better than most men--and drove a car like a young devil. There was
nothing, in fact, she couldn't do.

Graham was altogether serious about it. He had been scouting around
during the fortnight since his return and had his eyes on two or three
places that might do. There was one four-hundred-acre property that was
altogether desirable, ideal in fact, except for the one painful
particular that the cost of it was just about twice as much as Graham's
father was willing to run to. But if Rush would go in with him they need
seek no further. The thing was as good as settled.

"I did talk to father about it," Rush now told Mary. "The thing is a real
idea. Graham and I talked seriously about it while we were smoking before
we went up-stairs. The scheme is to run a dairy, hog and poultry
combination on a manufacturing basis and then sell our whole product
direct to two or three customers in town, one or two of the
clubs--perhaps a hotel. Deliver by motor truck every day, you see, and
leave the middleman out entirely. It's the only way to beat the game.
Father saw it like a shot. He said it would take a lot of money, of
course, but he thought he could manage my share."

Mary relaxed just perceptibly deeper in the pillows and her eyelids
drooped again. "It's getting awfully late," Rush said; "don't you want to
go to sleep?" But he needed no urging to go on when she asked him to tell
her all about it, and for another half hour he elaborated the plan.

He was still breezing along on the full tide of the idea, when,
happening to glance at her little traveling clock, he pulled himself up
short, took away her extra pillows, switched off her night lamp and
ordered her to go to sleep at once. Her apparent docility did not
altogether satisfy him and two or three times during the hour before he
himself fell asleep, he sat up to look under the door and see whether
she had turned the light on again.

He was right about that, of course. The enforced calm Mary had imposed
upon herself as a penance for the tempest of emotion she had
indulged--she had lain without moving, hardly a finger, from the time she
remade that bed and crept back into it until hearing Rush coming she
switched on the light--had had a sort of hypnotic effect upon her. So
long as her body did not move, it ceased to exist altogether and set her
spirit free, like a pale-winged luna moth from its chrysalis to adventure
into the night. The light it kept fluttering back to was that blinding
experience with March while the music of his song had surged through her
and her hand had been crushed in his.

Rush's coming in had brought her back to that tired still body of hers
again; his voice soothed, his presence comforted her; at his occasional
touch she was able to relax. (If only there were some one who loved her,
who would hold her tight--tight--) She hoped he would go on talking to
her; on and on. Because while he talked she could manage to stop
thinking--by the squirrel-like process of storing away all the ideas he
was suggesting to her for consideration later.

But when the respite was over and she lay back in the dark again, she
made no effort to deny admission to the thoughts that came crowding so
thickly. She must think; she must, before the ordeal of the next
breakfast table, have taken thought. She must have decided if not what
she should do, at least what she could hope for. She was much clearer and
saner for the little interlude with Rush.

Suppose in the first place;--suppose that Paula's rebellion was serious.
Suppose the Tower of Brass violated and the Princess carried away by the
_jinn_ or upon the magic carpet--whichever it was--to a world where none
of them could follow her. Suppose John Wollaston bereft again. Would not
Mary's old place be hers once more? Would not everything be just as it
had been during those two years before her father went to Vienna?

But some instinct in her revolted utterly at that. It was an instinct
that she could not completely reason out. But she knew that if such a
calamity befell, her old place would not exist or would be intolerable
if it did.

Suppose again:--suppose that Paula's rebellion could be somehow
frustrated. Would it be possible to save Paula for her father by saving
March from Paula? In plain words, by diverting him from Paula to herself.

That was a disgustingly vulgar way of putting it. But wasn't it what she
meant? And if she couldn't be honest with her own thoughts.... Well then,
were her powers of attraction great enough, even if they were consciously
exerted to the utmost, to outpull Paula's with a musician, with a man
whose songs she could sing as she had sung to-night?

That moment in Annie's old bedroom off the nursery supplied concretely
enough the answer to her question. They had been soul to soul in there,
they two. There was no language to describe the intimacy of it, except
perhaps the hackneyed phrases of the wedding service which had lost all
their meaning. And while they had stood together in the half dark, Paula
had opened the door, bringing the light in with her. She had taken him
confidently in her strong hands and kissed him and led him away without
one hesitating backward thought.

And the truth seemed clear enough, incandescent, now she looked back at
it, that it was Paula who had possessed him all along. That moment which
she had called her own had been Paula's. Mary had got it because she had
happened to come in and sit down beside him. She had, as it were, picked
his pocket. She stood convicted the moment the rightful owner appeared.
That was how much her chance of "saving" March from Paula amounted to.

What a hypocrite she had been to use that phrase even in her thoughts.
Save him from Paula, indeed! Paula could give him, even if she gave only
the half loaf, all he needed. She could inspire his genius, float it
along on the broad current of her own energy. Compared to that, what
could Mary give? What would it, her one possible gift, amount to?

She pulled herself up short. Wallowing again! No more of that. She'd
leave March alone, and on that resolution she'd stop thinking about him.
She'd think about Rush and Graham and the farm.

Graham! They didn't come, Rush had said, any whiter than that. Probably
he was right about it. It was a wonderful quality, that sort of
whiteness. What was it he had done (she didn't even remember!) that had
caused him such bitter self-reproach? You couldn't help liking him. It
ought not to be hard to fall sufficiently in love with him. And out on a
farm... A farmer's wife certainly had enough to do to keep her from
growing restless. With a lot of children, four to half a dozen,--no one
could call that a worthless life.

And it was practicable. With an even break in the luck, she could
accomplish the whole of it. A man like Graham she could make happy. Her
one gift would be enough for him; all he'd want. What was it he had told
Rush to-night? That he had always thought her the most perfect...

At that, appallingly, she was seized in the cold grip of an unforeseen
realization. She couldn't marry a boy like that--she couldn't marry any
man who regarded her like that--without first telling him what she was;
what she was not! She would have to make clear to him--there was simply
no escape from that--the nature of the thing that had happened in that
tiny flat in New York where she had lived alone so long.

It was possible, of course, oh, more than that, probable even, that after
hearing the story he would still want to marry her. That he might regard
her, no matter what she said, as having been wronged; her innocence,
though once taken advantage of by a scoundrel, intact. His love would be
reenforced by pity. He'd think of nothing, in the stress of that moment,
but the desire to protect her, to provide a fortress for her.

But would she dare, on these terms, marry him, or any other man for that
matter, no matter how ardently he professed forgiveness? It wouldn't be
until after the marriage was an accomplished thing, its first desires
satisfied, its first tension relaxed, that the story of her adventure
would begin to loom black and thunderous over the horizon of his mind.
(Who was the man? How could it have happened? In what mood of madness
could she have done such a thing? Might it ever,--when might it
not--happen again?) No! Marriage was difficult enough without being
handicapped additionally by a perennial misgiving like that. No
thoroughfare again!

She started once more around the circle, but one can not keep at that
sort of thing forever. About sunrise she fell asleep.


CHAPTER VIII

THE DUMB PRINCESS


None of his own family knew quite what to make of Anthony March. All of
them but his mother disapproved of him, on more or less mutually
contradictory grounds. Disapproved of him more than they did of one
another, though he occupied a sort of middle ground between them. It is a
possible explanation to the paradox that each of them regarded him as a
potential ally and so spent more time trying to change his ways, scolding
at him, pointing out his derelictions and lost opportunities, than it was
worth while spending on the others who were hopeless.

I shall be a little more intelligible, perhaps, if I tell you briefly
who they were. The father, David March, and Eveline, his wife, were New
Englanders. They both came, as a matter of fact, from within ten miles
of Glastonbury, Connecticut, though they didn't discover this fact until
after they'd met a number of times in the social and religious
activities of the Moody Institute. The lives of both had been woven in
the somber colors of Evangelical religion. With him this ran close to
fanaticism and served as an outlet for a very intense emotional life.
She was not highly energized enough to go to extremes in anything, but
she acquiesced in all his beliefs and practises, made him in short, a
perfectly dutiful wife according to the Miltonian precept, "He for God
only, she for God in him."

Back in New England she probably would not have married him for she was a
cut or more above him socially, the played-out end of a very fine line,
as her beautiful speech would have made evident to any sensitive ear. But
in Chicago, the disheveled, terrifying Chicago of the roaring eighties,
to all intents and purposes alone, clinging precariously to a
school-teacher's job which she had no special equipment for, she put up
only the weakest resistance to David March's determination that she
should be his wife.

He was a skilled artisan, a stringer and chipper in a piano factory
(chipping, if you care to be told, is the tuning a piano gets before its
action is put in). One would hardly have predicted then, considering the
man's energy and intelligence, that he would remain just that, go on
working at the same bench for thirty-five years. But, as I have said, his
energy found its main outlet in emotional religion.

Their first child, born in 1886, was a girl whom they named Sarah.
Anthony came two years later and for twelve years there were no more.
Then came the late baby, whom they appropriately named Benjamin and
allowed a somewhat milder bringing up than the iron rule the elder ones
had been subjected to.

It was the dearest wish of David's life to make a preacher of Anthony
and he must have got by way of answers to his prayers, signs which
reconciled him to the sheer impossibility of this project. The boy's
passion for music manifested itself very early and with this David
compromised by training him for the higher reaches of his own craft. He
got employment for Anthony in the piano factory for a year or two after
his graduation from high school and then sent him on for a liberal two
years in a school in Boston where the best possible instruction in piano
tuning was to be had.

Sarah was half-way through high school when her brother Benjamin was born
and for two years after she graduated, her mother's ill health, the
familiar breakdown of the middle forties, kept her at home. Then she
defied her father and took a job in a down-town office. What he objected
to, of course, was not her going to work but the use she made of the
independence with which self-support provided her. The quarrel never came
to a real break though often enough it looked like doing so, and except
for the brief period of her marriage Sarah always lived at home.

When Anthony came back from Boston, he revolted, too. He had not been a
prodigal; indeed, during his second year in the East, he had in one way
or another, earned his own living and he had learned even beyond his
father's hopes to tune pianos. But he did it at an incredibly small
expense in time and energy. What his heart went into during those two
years was the study of musical theory and composition, and, thanks to a
special aptitude which rose to the pitch of genius, he managed to make
the comparatively meager training he could get in so short a time,
suffice to give him the technical equipment he needed.

He came home armed, too, with a discovery. The discovery that a man not
enslaved by a possessive sense, a man whose self-respect is not dependent
upon the number of things he owns, a man able therefore to thumb his nose
at all the maxims of success, occupies really a very strong position.

He didn't like the factory, though he gave it what he considered a fair
trial. He didn't like the way they tuned pianos in a factory. The dead
level of mechanical perfection which they insisted upon was a stupid
affront to his ear. And, of course, the strict regimentation of life at
home, the, once more, dead level of the plateau upon which life was
supposed to be lived, was distasteful to one with a streak of the nomad
and the adventurer in him.

Thanks to his discovery he was able to construct an alternative to a life
like that. A skillful piano tuner could earn what money he needed
anywhere and could earn enough in a diligent week to set him free, his
simple wants provided for, for the rest of the month.

But even a wanderer needs a base, a point of departure for his
wanderings, and his father's house could not be made to serve that
purpose, so Anthony domiciled himself, after a long quest, in the half
story above a little grocery just off North LaSalle Street and not far
from the river.

It happened when Anthony had been living there a year or more that the
grocer, with whom he was on the friendliest of terms, got, temporarily,
into straits at precisely the time that Anthony had three hundred
dollars. He had won a prize of that amount offered by a society for the
encouragement of literature for the minor orchestral instruments, with a
concerto for the French horn. The grocer offered his note for it, but
Anthony thought of something better. He bought his room. It was to be his
to live in, rent free, for as long as time endured.

He took a childlike pleasure in this lair of his. It accumulated his
miscellaneous treasures like a small boy's pocket. He made a mystery of
it. He never gave it as his address. Not even his family knew where it
was, nor, more than vaguely, of its existence. The address he had given
Paula was the one he gave every one else, his father's house out on the
northwest side, just off Fullerton Avenue. This room, in a sense seldom
attained, was his own. When he came back from France, the day Lucile saw
him sitting on the bench in the park, he found it exactly--save for a
heavy coating of dust--as he had left it, in 1917, when he went down to
Camp Grant.

A good philosophy, so John Wollaston with a touch of envy had
admitted--if you can make it work. Where it breaks down with most young
men who set out so valiantly with it, is the point where one sees the
only girl in the world and recognizes the imperious necessity of winning
her, of holding out lures for her, of surrounding her, once won, with the
setting her superlative worth demands. That this did not happen to
Anthony March was due to the fact that the young woman he--not so much
saw as gradually perceived, was his sister Sarah's friend, Jennie
MacArthur.

Independence had been forced upon Jennie so early that she never was
called upon to decide whether she liked it or not. She had an inquiring
mind--perhaps experimental would be the better word for it--abundant
self-confidence and a good stiff backbone. It was easy to make the
mistake of thinking her hard. She was not a pretty woman, with her
sandy hair and rather striking freckles, but she was well formed, she
dressed always with that crisp cleanliness which is the extravagant
standard of young women who work in good offices, and her voice had an
attractive timbre.

To Sarah March (who, having fought for independence, was a little at a
loss what to do with it) Jennie's experience and her rather interesting
range of friends were a Godsend. It was at one of Jennie's parties in the
tiny pair of rooms where she lived alone that Sarah met Walter Davis, a
mechanical draftsman by day and an ardent young Socialist by night, whom
she afterward married.

On the other hand, the home which Sarah was sometimes rather dubious
about the advantage of possessing, was to Jennie a delightful place to be
a familiar visitor in. She liked old David, who was a surprisingly
charming person when he had no authority over you, she liked Mrs. March,
she adored little Ben--young Ben he was now rapidly growing up to be--and
finally, she began taking an interest which eventually outweighed all the
rest, in the family black sheep, Anthony.

The intimacy between them which began around the time of Sarah's marriage
continued intermittently for nearly four years. It had not, indeed, been
definitely broken off when he went into the army.

When the attraction faded as it had definitely begun to do some months
before he went to Camp Grant, it left their friendship unimpaired,
enriched on the contrary. He could talk to her more easily, confide his
thoughts to her more freely than to any one else he knew.

This ability to be confided in and depended upon was one of her special
talents. She had emerged, years before, from the crowded stenographers'
room in a big engineering concern into the private office of the chief.
He was an erratic genius, brilliant, irritable, exacting, tireless, all
but impossible to maintain any consistent relation with but one of bitter
enmity. He had about made up his mind that a fresh stenographer every
morning was all he could hope for, when Jennie became his Scheherazade.
By the time the war broke out she was as indispensable to him as his
hands. He had made her an officer of the company and paid her a salary of
six thousand dollars a year, but she went on remembering his engagements,
writing his letters and soothing the outraged feelings of his clients
just as she had done in humbler days. She was, in the good, old-fashioned
sense, his better half. Her amusement was the stock market and she played
it cannily and with considerable success with his rather diabolic
encouragement.

She was in New York when March got home, and he saw her for the first
time since his return at his father's house on a Sunday morning more
than a fortnight after the evening at the Wollastons' when Paula had
sung his songs.

It was his first appearance anywhere since the afternoon in Novelli's
studio when he had shown his opera to La Chaise and Paula. It had been
agreed among them that with certain important changes, it would make an
admirable vehicle for Paula's return to the operatic stage, and being a
small affair from the producer's point of view, involving only one
interior set, would be practicable for production during the summer at
Ravinia in case the project for Paula's singing there went through. March
had agreed to the changes and withdrawn into his stronghold over the
grocery store with a determination not more than to come up for air until
he had worried the thing into the shape they wanted.

He didn't know it was Sunday--having attributed the peacefulness he
found pervading Fullerton Avenue to his own good conscience, a purely
subjective phenomenon--until in the parlor of his father's house the
sight of his brother Ben at the piano playing a soundless tune upon
the tops of the keys, brought it home to him. When he inquired for the
rest of the family, he learned that they were up-stairs getting ready
for church.

"I hope," he said, with a grin at his younger brother, "that you aren't
suffering from that old hebdomadal sore throat of yours."

"No, it's all right," Ben said, declining though to be amused. "I've got
a gentleman's agreement with Sarah. Every other Sunday. Father's well
enough satisfied now if he gets one of us. When they're all gone, I can
slip out and buy a Sunday paper--jazz up the piano--have a regular orgy.
Every other Sunday! Gee, but it's fierce!"

"It's pathetic," March said. "Poor father! I don't suppose there's any
help for it."

What struck him was the pitiful futility of his father's persistence in
trying to impose his ways, his beliefs, his will, upon one so rapidly
growing into full independence. The only sanction he had was a tradition
daily becoming more fragile. He was in for the bitterness of another
disappointment. That was what there was no help for.

Naturally young Ben didn't interpret it this way. "You're a nice one
to talk like that," he said resentfully. "You've always done whatever
you pleased."

"There's nothing to prevent you from doing the same thing if you look at
it that way," Anthony observed. "You've got a job a man could live on,
haven't you?"

"Live on? Fifteen dollars a week?"

And it may be admitted that Ben's sense of outrage had some foundation.
Years ago he had made up his small young mind that he would never work in
the factory and he settled the question by getting himself a job in one
of the piano salesrooms on Wabash Avenue. He wasn't precisely a salesman
yet, he might perhaps have been spoken of by an unkind person as an
office boy. But it was essential that he look like a salesman and act
like a salesman, even in the matter of going to lunch. Some day soon, he
was going to succeed in completing a sale before some one else came
around and took it out of his hands, and he could then strike for a
regular commission.

In the meantime with shoes and socks and shirts and neckties costing what
they did, the suggestion that his salary was adequate to provide a
bachelor's independence was fantastic and infuriating.

"Yes," he grumbled, "if I wanted to live in a rat hole and look
like a tramp."

"My rat hole isn't so bad to live in," Anthony said, "but I'd be sorry to
think I looked like a tramp. Do I, for a fact? I haven't had this suit on
since I went into the army but I thought it looked all right."

"Oh, there's a big rip in the back of the shoulder where the padding is
sticking through and your cuffs are frayed and your necktie's got a hole
worn plumb through it where the wing of your collar rubs. You don't look
like a tramp, of course, because you look clean and decent. It would be
all right if you had to be like that. Only it's all so darned
unnecessary. You could make good money if you'd only live like a regular
person. Every day or two, somebody telephones to know if you aren't home
and if there isn't some way we can get word to you, and it's kind of
humiliating to have to say there isn't;--that we don't know where you
are, haven't seen you for a week,--things like that. Of course, it's none
of my business, but _I'm_ trying to pull out of this. I'd like to _be_
somebody someday and it would be a darn sight easier if you were trying
to pull the same way instead of queering us all the time."

"Yes, I know," Anthony said thoughtfully. "But then there's Sarah on the
other hand who can't forgive me for not putting on a red necktie and
going Bolshevik. She'd have me put in my time trying to upset the
bourgeois applecart altogether."

Ben grinned. "You ought to have heard her go on about the limousine that
came and left a note for you the other day. Lady inside, chauffeur in a
big fur coat. He came up to the door and asked whether you were home and
left the note when Sarah said you weren't. Last Thursday, I think that
was, just before supper. It's over there on the mantel, I guess. Sarah's
afraid you're going to turn into a little brother of the rich."

"You tell Sarah," Anthony said off the top of his mind, the rest of it
obviously engaged with the note,--"you tell Sarah there's nothing
capitalistic about this. This is from her Doctor Wollaston's wife.
Certainly he earns his living if anybody does."

"Do they want their piano tuned again?" Ben asked.

"They don't mention it. They want to know if I'll come to lunch to-day.
I'm going to telephone to see if the invitation has expired."

"Good lord!" said Ben, "what have you got to wear? You can't go looking
like that!" He meant to go into particulars when his brother came back
from the telephone. But by that time he had something of nearer concern
to himself to think about. Anthony found him staring out the window with
an expression of the liveliest dismay.

"Oh, look who's here!" he said. "Can you beat it?"

Anthony looked and saw a little Ford coupé pulling up to the curb in
front of the house; looked more closely at the person at the wheel
and blinked.

"Jennie MacArthur! I thought she was still in New York. But what's she
doing in that car?"

"Oh, she bought it last fall," Ben said. "She's getting rich. But can't
you see what it means? She's coming around to see Sarah and that'll give
Sarah an excuse for staying home from church. And that means that _I'll_
have to go."

"Don't worry about that," Anthony said, catching up his hat. "I'll head
her off. Tell mother I'll be around to-night."

He intercepted Jennie at the car door, caught both her hands and pressed
them tight, pushed her back into her seat as he did so, climbed in and
sat down beside her. "I'm supposed to be saving Ben from the horrible
fate of getting dragged to church when it's really Sarah's Sunday," he
said. "If you'll just drive me around the corner, I'll explain."

But she prevented him with a little laugh when he would have begun. "This
is good enough for me. I don't want any explanation."

"It's pretty good," he agreed. "Stop a minute now we're safely around the
corner and let me have a look at you."

She obeyed him, literally, pulling up to the curb again, accorded him the
look he wanted and took, meanwhile, one of her own at him. Neither of
them, however, seemed to find just the phrase in which to announce the
result of this scrutiny. She started on again presently and he relaxed
against the cushion. "This is more like being home again than anything
that's happened yet," he said. "Are we to have a real visit?"

She was free till lunch she told him, and he, after saying "Well, that's
something," admitted his own engagement. "However, that's the best part
of two hours. The thing is not to waste any of it."

Naturally enough they wasted a good deal of it. They talked about the
little car they were riding in, how she had learned to drive, why she had
bought it; how Mr. Ferris, her boss, had said he wouldn't be any good for
the day after coming down-town in a tight jammed elevated train and how,
having tried the new method of transportation she had agreed with him;
how it was as easy to run as a typewriter.

A few minutes more of that, she thought, and she'd begin telling Ford
jokes, so she wrenched around to a new subject and asked him how much
he'd seen of France; what he thought of the French; how long he'd been
home; and what it seemed like to be in civilian clothes again;--topics
upon which he enlarged as well as he could. She had driven meanwhile,
north to Diversey Boulevard and had then turned west, around the ring.
They were out in the middle of Garfield Park when she said after a hard,
tight silence, "Isn't this perfectly ghastly?"

"It's awful," he agreed. "I don't know what's the matter with us--or
whose fault it is. But I certainly didn't mean to get started like this."

"I expect that's it," she told him. "Haven't you been trying to treat
me just exactly right? Make me feel perfectly comfortable? Haven't you
been--being tactful, with all your might, ever since we started?
Because I have."

"Well, then, for heaven's sake," he said, "let's quit! Quit trying so
infernally hard, I mean. It's too nice a morning to spoil. You know, if
the sun manages to come out, as it's trying to, it will be a very
handsome April day."

"I don't think talking about the weather is much of an improvement," she
commented. "Tony, let's give it up, for to-day I mean. We'll try again
sometime from a fresh start. This is perfectly hopeless."

He tried to pretend that she didn't mean it but she made it clear even
with a touch of asperity that she did. "Oh, all right," he growled and
reached for the handle to the door.

"Don't be silly," she commanded. "I'm not going to leave you out here in
the wilds of Garfield Park. Where do you want to go? Is it too early for
your lunch?"

"Mrs. Wollaston told me to come at one," he said. "You aren't supposed to
be ahead of time for a thing like that, are you? Anyhow, I've got to go
back to my room first."

She caught up the name. "Sarah told me about your going there. First to
tune the piano and then the evening when she sang your songs. Sarah's
quite eloquent about it."

"Yes, poor Sarah, I know. Ben was quoting her this morning. However, that
won't make the least difference with what I'm going to do."

"What are you going to do?" she asked.

"Why, I suppose," he said, "that I'm going to do what people speak of as
settling down. What they mean by that is taking an interest in
consequences--more of an interest in what things lead to than in what
they are. Well, that's what I'm at now."

"That's a change, all right, for you," she said.

He agreed with her. "I knew when it happened," he added. "It happened
when I heard Paula Carresford sing one of my songs. Do you remember the
story that used to be in the school reader about the tiger that tasted
blood and ate up the princess? You know, Jennie, it's practically true
that up to that night I'd never heard any of my music at all--except
mutilated fragments of it as I played it myself. And I'll tell you it was
a staggering experience. The queerest experience I ever had in my life,
too. I'll tell you about that sometime. But I changed right there, just
the way the tiger did. I don't happen to want a fur overcoat nor an
automobile nor an apartment on the Drive. I honestly don't want them.
They aren't a part of my dreams--never were. But I do want to hear my own
music. I want to hear it done for all it's worth. I want to hear
orchestras play it and singers as good as Paula Carresford sing it. And
in order to do that I've got to look ahead a little. I've got to stop
doing always exactly as I damned please. I've got to do things because
somebody besides myself wants them done."

"Have you got something like that to do to-day--with an eye to the
consequences?" she asked.

He looked sharply around at her. She was very intent on her driving just
then. "That's a remarkably good guess in a way," he said. "I dread going
to that house to lunch. A month ago I'd have refused--or pretended I
hadn't got the invitation until too late. And I'd have pretended to
myself that it was because I didn't care to play the social game; didn't
want to take on obligations of a kind I couldn't meet. But now I've told
Mrs. Wollaston I'd come, I know the real reason why I don't want to.

"I said just now I didn't want a fur overcoat nor an automobile, and
that's eighty percent true. And yet, there's a crawly little snob
inside me that's in a panic right now because I haven't got proper
clothes to wear and because I'm going to have to sit down in front of a
lot of funny shaped forks that I don't know the special uses of.

"Oh, there's more to it than that of course. It's rather a cross-grained
situation. Wollaston doesn't like me. He thinks I'm responsible for his
wife's having kicked over the traces and signed up to sing at Ravinia
this summer. In a way, I suppose I am. She's planning to use that opera
of mine, you remember,--_The Outcry_ we called it--for a novelty,
provided they like the way I've padded up her part. The big rôle in it is
really for the baritone, of course. That's what I've been slaving over
for the last two weeks. If she makes a hit with it, she'll take it to the
Metropolitan next winter. Of course, there's no reason in God's world why
she shouldn't do that if she can get away with it. She hasn't any
children to look after; she told me she didn't even keep house for her
husband. All the same he regards me as a sort of potential homewrecker."

"You can't quite blame him for that, can you?" Jennie suggested. "If you
began reading a story about a beautiful young opera singer who left her
husband to go back on the stage again and sing an opera by a musical
genius she'd discovered, wouldn't you expect them to fall in love with
each other?"

"That shows what nonsense stories are," he said. "That couldn't happen to
us in a thousand years. She's beautiful, and kindly, and affectionate.
She's got temperament enough to blow the cork out of any bottle you tried
to hold it down in. But I couldn't fall in love with her if I tried. It
doesn't happen on that basis. Besides which, it's my belief that she's
altogether in love with her husband. All the same, she's taken me up. She
means to push me for all she's worth and let her husband like it or lump
it as he pleases. She's got some plans, I don't know just what, for
showing me off to one or two of the 'right' people to-day. You can
imagine what it will be like, can't you?"

"I should think it would be rather good fun--that sort of game," she
commented.

"That's where the forks come in," he said. "And not having a proper
coat. That sort of social skill is the suit of armor those people wear.
I've got to go back to my room and sew up the rip Ben told me about and
trim my cuffs and try to tie my necktie so that the worn-out spots won't
show-and make them do."

It was but a few minutes later--they had been silent ones--that she
stopped her car in front of the little grocery store where the rickety
outside stair led up to his door.

"I'll come in with you and sew up the rip in your coat," she said.

She wouldn't have made that offer, indeed would hardly have driven him up
to his own door, if she had not been a young woman with steady nerves and
a level head, and an abundant confidence in both. Because that dingy
little wooden building with its outside stair to his attic, was the
nucleus of memories that had by no means lost their poignancy. It was
not, after all, so many years ago that she had mounted that stair for the
first time, and it couldn't be considered strange that her heart
quickened a little as she climbed it now.

The room startled her by being so utterly unchanged. Not only the major
articles in it; the stove, the iron bed, the deal table he wrote at, the
carpenter's bench, the half invented musical typewriter that he had once
attempted to convert an old square piano into, the hollow-backed easy
chair,--but the quite minor and casual trifles as well. On top of the set
of home-made shelves that served for his music and his books was a sort
of still-life composed of a meerschaum pipe with a broken stem and an
empty goblet of pressed glass, standing upon a yellow paper-covered copy
of Anatole France's _Thais_, that had been just like that the last time
she was here. She had stuck a bunch of sweet peas she was wearing into
that goblet. It made an uncannily short bridge to the past, a trivial
reminder like that.

Evidently he felt it, too. Perhaps he had followed her glance toward that
dusty shelf corner. Because, a moment after he had shut the door behind
them, opened a window and taken a look at the fire, he came hesitantly
and a little awkwardly up to her and took her by the shoulders as if to
draw her into an embrace. He was very gentle about it.

Also he was ludicrously tentative. If she'd wanted to let herself go she
could have laughed rather hysterically about that. She disengaged herself
from his hands, decisively, indeed, yet without any air of pique.

"Oh, no, my dear," she said. "Take off your coat and let me get to work.
Where's your sewing kit?"

He produced it instantly (the room was not in real disorder; it only
looked like that to one who did not understand its system), gave her his
coat, wandered restlessly about for a few minutes and presently came to
rest at the deal table where he had spent the greater part of the last
fortnight, turning over, discontentedly, the sheets of score paper he had
left there.

Over her sewing she let her mind run free, forgetting this present Sunday
with its problems, mixing a pleasant amalgam of the past. She wasn't
heartbroken, you know, hardly regretful. She had life about as she wanted
it. She never had been in love with March in the accepted meaning of the
phrase--she had never even thought she was--and it is altogether probable
that if she had found him eager to resume the old relation, she would
have felt a certain reluctance about taking it up again. Life changed
with the years and some of its old urgencies quieted down--for the time
anyhow. Still the night when she had worn those sweet peas remained a
fragrant memory. She was recalled to the present by the violent gesture
he made over the score on his work table.

"This damned thing is rotten," he said with angry conviction. "I knew
it,--I knew it while I wrote it. It may be what they want, but it's
rotten. Straight into the stove is where it ought to go."

"Is that what you're writing for Mrs. Wollaston?" she asked.

He nodded. "I was trying to make up my mind whether to take this with me
to-day or not. If she's the musician I think she is, she'll tell me to
carry it out to the ash can."

"Well, that will be better than putting it in the stove yourself," she
observed, going back with an air of placidity to her sewing, "because
then you'll know it's bad and if you burn it up now, you won't. You
haven't even heard it."

"I heard it before I wrote it," he argued. "I hear it again when I read
it. That's a silly argument. Of course I know it."

"You said a little while ago that you'd never heard any of your music
until Mrs. Wollaston sang those songs. They sounded better than you
thought they would."

"That's different," he protested. "I knew they were good, damned good.
Only I didn't quite realize how good they were. I suppose I won't realize
until I hear her sing this how rotten it is. But I don't need to. I know
well enough right now."

He went on turning the pages back and forth with gloomy violence, reading
a passage here and another there and failing to get the faintest ray of
comfort out of any of it, even out of the old soiled quires which
belonged obviously to the original score.

"Is it all bad?" she asked. "Or just the new part."

"The whole thing," he grunted.

"That's that Belgian thing, isn't it?"

"That's the one."

"Well," she pointed out to him, "you thought that was good once. If it
all looks alike to you this morning, perhaps what you've just been
writing is as good as that, and it's just your mood to-day that makes it
look rotten."

He closed the score and slapped his hand down upon it with a gesture of
dismissal. Then he rose and leaned back against the edge of the table.
"That's good logic, my dear," he conceded, "but it doesn't cover the
ground. The old stuff was good in a way. I really meant it and felt it
and I managed to get it down on paper. And the new stuff is like it, in
that it's a damned clever imitation of it. I had to do it that way
because I couldn't get back into the old mood. I'm sick of atrocities and
horrors--everything that's got the name of war in it, even though I was
never under fire myself. Well, writing the imitation has made me hate the
thing I was trying to imitate. I stuck at it for the reason I told you
this morning. But, good God, when it results in stuff like this...!
Jennie, what shall I do about it? Shall I take this thing now and chuck
it into the stove and then tell La Chaise and Mrs. Wollaston to go to the
devil? Or shall I tuck it under my arm like a good little boy and see if
I can get away with it?"

She looked at him thoughtfully. "What is the new thing you want to
write?" she asked.

He smiled. "You're a wonder, Jennie," he said. "There is a new thing.
I'm simply swamped in it. It won't let me alone. It's been driving me
pretty nearly crazy. That's why it's been such perfect hell sticking to
this other thing. Jennie, it's another opera. A big one, full size. A
romantic fairy opera. I haven't got it in order yet. It isn't fit to
talk about. But it's about a princess, a little blue-eyed, pale-haired
princess, who is under a spell. She's dumb. She's dumb except in the
presence of her true lover. Do you see? They are trying to cure her and
they can't. But mysteriously in the night they hear her singing. Her
lover is with her, and they try to solve the mystery. Maybe they kill
him, I don't know. Or maybe they make him faithless to her. I don't know
whether there is a fairy story like that or whether I just made it up.
And I haven't worked it out at all. I haven't any words for it, no book,
nor anything. But I tell you it comes in waves, whole scenes from it.
I'd like a hundred hands to write it down with. I'd like to take one
header into it and never come up. And meanwhile I'm slugging away at
that other damned thing because Mrs. Wollaston and LaChaise want
it,--because it's the main chance."

She asked why he didn't tell them about the new idea and get them to
adopt it instead, but he greeted this suggestion with an impatient laugh.

"It would be absolutely impossible for Ravinia in the first place," he
said. "The thing would need as big a production as, oh, _Pelléas and
Melisande_. And then this woman could never sing it. She isn't the type.
This is different altogether from anything she could do. Oh, no, it's
quite hopeless until after I've succeeded with something else. But, oh,
my God, Jennie, if you could hear it!"

She had finished her repairs on his coat and rising now held it up to
him. While he was groping for the sleeves, she asked quietly, "Who is the
princess, Tony? The dumb little princess with the blue eyes."

For a second he stood just as he was, like one suddenly frozen, then he
settled into his coat, walked over to his work chair and dropped into it,
leaning forward and propping up his head with his hands. "Yes," he said.
"In a way, perhaps, there is some one. That's what I was going to tell
you about. She came in as quiet as a little ghost, just as Mrs.
Wollaston was beginning to sing and she sat down beside me without a
word. And somehow while we listened, we--we were the same person. I can't
make you understand that. It never happened to me before, nothing in the
least like it, nothing so--intimate. I felt that song go vibrating right
through her. She didn't speak at all, even after it was over, except to
say that we mustn't talk--while we were waiting for the people in the
other room to go away. And then Mrs. Wollaston came and got me. She
didn't see her at all. She had disappeared somehow by that time."

He stopped but Jennie, it seemed, had nothing to say just then. She
turned away to her outdoor wrap but she laid it down again and stood
still when he went on.

"You don't want to run away with the idea that I'm in love with her," he
said. "That isn't it. That's particularly--not it. I haven't an idea who
she is nor any intention of trying to find out. Even if I knew the way to
begin getting acquainted with her, I'm inclined to think I'd avoid it.
But as an abstraction--no, that's not what I mean--as a symbol of what
I'll find waiting for me whenever I get down to the core of things ...
I've got a sort of--superstition if I don't do anything to--to break the
spell, you know, that sometime she'll come back just the way she came
that night."

With a little exaggeration of the significance of the act, she put on the
coat she had crossed the room to get. He got up and came over to help her
but he stopped with a sudden clenching of the hands, and a wave of color
in his face as he saw the look in hers. At that she came swiftly to meet
him, pulled him up in a tight embrace and kissed him.

"Good luck, my dear," she said. "I must be running and so must you. I'd
take you with me only we go different ways. Carry your score along to the
Wollastons. That's the first step to the princess, I guess."


CHAPTER IX

IN HARNESS


The episode upon which March had built the opera he called _The Outcry_,
was one that was current during the autumn of 1914. A certain Belgian
town had been burnt and it had been officially explained that this was
done because the German officer who was billeted upon the burgomaster had
been shot. The story was that the burgomaster's son shot him because he
had raped his sister. The thing got complete possession of March's mind.
At first just the horror of it and later its dramatic and musical
possibilities. He saw, in orchestral terms, the sodden revelry in that
staid house--with its endless cellars of Burgundy. He saw the tight-drawn
terror in the girl's room where she lay in bed. He saw the room lighted
fitfully by the play of searchlights over the city; the sinister entrance
from a little balcony through the French widow, of the officer in
uniform, his shadow flung ahead of him by the beam of the searchlight. He
saw the man, blood--as well as wine--drunk, garrulous and fanatic with
the megalomania of the conquering invader. He saw the man's intention
made clear from the first, but the execution of it luxuriously postponed.
Safely postponed because of the terrified girl's acceptance of his
assurance that if anything happened to him, if a hand were raised against
him, her father and a dozen more hostages would be shot and the town
burned to the ground. Then came the girl's irrepressible outcry when he
first touched her; the brother's knock at the door; her frantic effort to
reassure him frustrated by the officer's drunken laugh; the forcing of
the door and the fight half in the dark; the killing of the girl and then
of her ravisher.

The thing that wouldn't let March alone, that forced him into the
undertaking, was the declaration of the brutal philosophy of the
conqueror made by the officer while he gloated over the girl who was to
be his prey; the chance to put into musical terms that paranoiac delusion
of world conquest. One recognized in it, vaguely, some of 'Wagner's
themes and some of Straus', distorted and grown monstrous.

The thing had haunted March, as I have said, and he had tried to find
somebody who would write him the book, the indispensable preliminary to
his getting to work. Failing here, he had audaciously made up his mind to
write it himself. It was not his first attempt to do, in the mere light
of nature, a thing commonly supposed to be impossible except at the end
of painful instruction. He had once experimented at painting in oils, he
had tried his hand at the stylus, he had made a few figurines in
modeling-wax. He wrote his play, then, by the simple process of building
first with painstaking accuracy, a model of his stage, the girl's room in
that burgomaster's house with the French windows giving upon the little
balcony. He modeled the furniture in plastiscene. He bought three little
dolls to represent his characters. And then he reported what he saw
happening in that room; what his characters did and what they said. By
the time he had finished this work, the music was all in his head. He
couldn't write it down fast enough.

It had been one of the great experiences of his life, writing that opera.
Jennie's reminder that he had once believed it good, was a conservative
statement. LaChaise and Paula were deeply impressed by the power, both of
its music and its drama and saw possibilities in it for a sensational
success. The drawback, fatal unless it could be overcome, lay in the fact
that the dominant rôle in it was that of the baritone. Dramatically the
soprano's part was good enough, but there was nowhere near enough for
her to sing. There was no reason though, they both asserted, and sent
March away from their conference at least half convinced, why the girl's
part could not be greatly amplified. There were various expedients;--a
preliminary scene between the girl and her brother; an apostrophe to an
absent lover; a prayer. Also instead of being frozen into terror-stricken
silence by her ravisher's monstrous purpose, she could just as well be
represented as making a desperate resistance. She could plead with him,
denounce him; attempt to take advantage of his drunkenness and trick him.
It could be made as good a woman's part as the big act of _Tosca_.

March had assented to all this and gone to work.

Paula did not tell him, as he had gloomily prophesied to Jennie, to take
the new first scene he brought her that Sunday out to the ash can. And,
indeed, it sounded so much better when they read it over together, that
he was for the moment reassured. But her attitude toward the opera was
different from the one she had taken toward the group of Whitman songs,
and this difference grew more marked at their subsequent sessions over
it. There had been about the songs the glamour of discovery. One does not
hasten to apply the assayer's acid to treasure trove. And, too, it was an
altruistic impulse which had prompted her to take up the songs.

There aren't many people who can travel steadily, or very far, on that
motivation, and Paula was not one of them. From the moment when she took
the plunge, ignored--all but defied--her husband's wishes, and signed the
Ravinia contract, she ceased to be concerned for anything, broadly
speaking, but her own success. March's opera, then, was not, to her, the
expression of his genius but a potential vehicle for hers. She was
acutely critical of it. She knew what she wanted and it was not
thinkable that she should put up with anything less.

She was not aware of this change of attitude. She was blessed with a
vigorous non-analytical mind that asked no awkward questions,
suggested no paralyzing doubts. The best thing that could possibly
happen to March's opera was that it should be made to fit her; that it
should demand precisely all her resources and nothing that was beyond
them. Obviously, since it was going to be her opera, a thing she was
going to wear.

Had she been, as many eminent persons in her profession are, a mere
bundle of insensate egotisms complicated by a voice, she would have
driven March to flat rebellion in a week, all his good resolutions
notwithstanding. What made it tolerable was that she had a good musical
intelligence of her own, and a real dramatic sense. He could recognize,
what she wanted as an intelligible thing, consistent with itself. Only,
it was not his thing-not the thing he saw. By reason of its very
consistency it was never the thing he saw.

"She wouldn't do it that way," he would protest.

"I would," Paula would tell him. "I wouldn't lie there, whimpering."

He was always arguing with her--wrangling, it almost came to,
sometimes--in defense of his own conception. For a sample:

"Look at what she is; a burgomaster's daughter. That means prosperous,
narrow-minded, middle-class people. She's convent-bred, devout. She's
still young or she'd be married. She's altogether without experience.
She's frightened just as a child would be over what's going on in the
house. And the prayer she says when she goes to bed would be just the
nice little prayer a child would say, an Our Father or a Hail Mary,
whatever it might be. As simple as possible, on the surface, but with an
undertone of overmastering terror. The sort of Promethean defiance you're
talking about would be inconceivable to a child like that."

"I suppose it would, to most of them," she admitted, "but this one's
going to be different. After all, it's the exceptional ones that usually
have operas written about them. I don't believe all the dancers in
Alexandria were like Thais, nor all the gipsy cigar-makers in Seville
like Carmen. I don't believe many little Japanese girls would feel about
Pinkerton the way Cio Cio San did. Why can't our Dolores be an
exception, too?"

The only answer he could make to that was that it spoiled the other
figure, reduced him from a sort of cosmic monster to the mere custom-made
grand-opera villain.

"What if it does?" she retorted. "This isn't being written for Scotti or
Vanni Marcoux. It's being written for me." That was the tonic chord they
always came back to. It was Paula's opera.

March presently began to feel, too, that he was growing to be nothing
more than Paula's composer. It was important to the success of their
enterprise that his reputation should be intensively exploited among the
rich and influential who figured as patrons of the Ravinia season. She
went at the task of building it as ruthlessly as she remodeled his opera.

Her demands upon him were explicit. In the first place he was to bring
her all his music, early as well as late, trivial as well as important,
in order that she might select from it what, if anything, might be
exploited at once. She had promised to give a recital just before Easter,
in aid of one of the local charities--it was one that boasted an
important list of patronesses--and if she could make an exclusive program
of his songs she would like to do so. Then, while it was too late to get
any of his compositions performed by the orchestra this season, it would
be a good thing to get Mr. Stock to read something in the hope of his
taking it for next year. An announcement, even a mere unofficial
intimation, that Anthony March (whose opera ... and so on)--was to be
represented on the symphony programs next season, would help a lot.

What dismayed him most was her insistence--she was clear as a bell about
this--that he himself get up the accompaniments to some of the simpler of
his songs so that when she took him out to meet people who wanted to hear
a sample of his music then and there, they could manage, between them,
some sort of compliance. He nearly got angry, but decided to laugh
instead, over her demand that he be waiting, back stage, when she gave
her recital of his songs (which she did with great success) to come out
at the end and take his bow in his now discarded uniform. It was the only
reference she ever made to his shabby appearance.

(It was steadily growing shabbier, too, since she left him hardly any
time at all for tuning pianos. She would have been utterly horrified had
she known what tiny sums he was living on from week to week. And it never
occurred to her when she suggested that a certain score of his ought to
be copied, that he could not afford to take it out to a professional
copyist and so sat up nights doing it himself. He did it rather easily,
to be sure, since it was one of the numerous things at which he had
earned a living.)

There was only one of her many demands that he persistently refused to
comply with. And she took this refusal rather hard; acted more hurt than
angry about it, to be sure, but came back to it again and again. When she
discovered that he made no pretense of living at his father's house, she
asked for his real address so that she could always be sure of getting
at him when she wanted him. This he would not give her. If he did, he
said, it would only result in his staying away from there and doing his
work somewhere else. It was one of his simple necessities to know that he
couldn't be got at. He would make every possible concession. Would go, or
telephone, at punctiliously regular and brief intervals, to his father's
house to learn whether she had sent for him, but give up the secrecy of
his lair he would not. It wasn't possible.

I think she compensated herself for this refusal by sending for him
sometimes when she did not really need him, just to be on the safe side,
and, on the same basis, engaged his attendance ahead from day to day.
Anyhow, she occupied, in one way or another, practically the whole of his
time; and the dumb little blue-eyed princess knocked at his door in vain.
Only in those hours when sheer fatigue had sent him to bed had she any
opportunity of visiting him. Sometimes she made white nights for him by
haunting those hours, refusing to go away; sometimes, by not coming at
all, she filled him with terror lest she had gone for good--would not
come back even when he was ready for her. When that panic was upon him he
hated Paula with a devouring hatred.

Of the human original of his blue-eyed princess, he saw during those
weeks, nothing. On that first Sunday when he lunched at the house he
heard them speak of a member of the family, a daughter of John Wollaston,
named Mary, who had been living in New York and had recently returned but
was not lunching at home that day. He got the idea then that she might be
the girl who had so mysteriously come in and sat beside him while Paula
sang; and without any evidence whatever to support this surmise, it
became a settled conviction. But an odd shrinking, almost superstitious,
as he had confessed to Jennie, from doing anything that might break the
spell kept him from asking any questions.

During the first week of his almost daily visits to the house, he got
repeated intimations of her, a glimpse once through an open door on the
third floor into a room that struck him as being, probably, hers. The
impression, once more, when he was coming down from the music room that
this was the door which he had just heard softly shut as if some one, the
princess herself, of course, who had stood listening to the music for a
while, had withdrawn there when she heard his step on the stairs. Once on
the settee in the hall he saw a riding crop and a small beaver hat that
he felt a curious certainty belonged to her and once out of a confusion
of young voices in the drawing-room, and a dance tune going on the
Victrola, he heard some one call out her name, hers he was sure though he
didn't hear her answer. Perhaps she had answered without speaking. The
dumb princess again.

Then suddenly even these faint hints of her presence ceased, and he
remarked their absence with a troubled wonder until one day Paula
volunteered the statement that Mary had gone away on a visit for a month
or two, out to Wyoming, where a great friend of hers, Olive Corbett, and
her husband had a ranch.

By asking a few intelligent questions, he could have found out a lot
more about her from Paula for she was disposed to talk freely enough
about the family life she was so oddly enclosed in, and their perpetual
quarrels about the opera never carried over into their breathing spells.
In the long hours of their almost daily sessions the occasional rests
made up quite a total and March accumulated a lot of information about
Paula herself.

Indeed it was not quite as idle as that sounds. Paula talked to him
thirstily, gave him somehow the impression that she had had no one for a
good many years with whom she could converse without reservation in her
own idiom.

She came, he learned, of a Virginia family which had migrated during her
early childhood to California. It was obvious that they were well-bred,
but equally so that they were not very competent. The victims, he judged,
of a lot of played-out southern ideas and traditions. They were still
living and March allowed himself to guess that they were one of the minor
reasons why Doctor John had to earn a lot of money.

Paula with her splendid physique and gorgeous voice must have looked to
them like the family hope. They had managed at considerable sacrifice to
send her abroad, but evidently without any idea of the time and the money
it takes to erect even the most promising material into a genuine
success. After a year or two, she had been abandoned to make her way as
best she could.

Even now that they were safely consigned to the past, Paula could not
talk about the shifts and hardships of that time with any relish. The
discouragements must have sunk in pretty deep. She hinted--it was not
the sort of topic she could discourse candidly about--that the
blackest of those discouragements had come from the amorous advances
of men who had it in their power to open opportunities to her but
wanted a _quid pro quo_.

He asked her in that connection whether during those hard times she had
never felt inclined to fall in love on her own account.

"I never cared a snap of my fingers for any man," she said with obvious
sincerity, "until I saw John."

This slowness of her erotic development surprised him rather until he
evoked the explanation that her energies had been concentrated upon her
musical ambition. Music, since she was a real musician, had been a
genuine emotional outlet for her.

March speculated rather actively upon the relation between Paula and her
husband. There was no dark room in the composer's mind. He was the other
pole from Aunt Lucile. All human problems set his mind at work. He was
not widely read in the literature of psychology and he had a rough
working theory which he regarded as his own, a dynamic theory. People got
started off in life with a certain amount of energy. It varied immensely
between individuals, of course, but one couldn't alter the total of his
own. Upon that store you ran until you were spent. What channels this
stream of energy cut for itself was partly a matter of luck, partly one
of self-determination. The important fact was that there was only so much
and that what went down one way did not also go down another. It might be
a hundred rivulets or one river, it couldn't be both. This philosophy was
largely responsible for the ordering of his own life, for his doing
without possessions, for the most part without friends, for his keeping
the brake set so tightly upon his sex impulses.

John must have come into Paula's life, he reflected, at a time when the
musical outlet to her energies had been dammed up. Her main stream, like
that of the Mississippi, had cut a new channel for itself. Had there
been, he wondered, some similar obstruction in the main channel of John
Wollaston's emotional life? Anyhow, there was no doubt that for the five
years since this cataclysm had occurred, the course of true love had run
smooth and deep. But suppose now that, through LaChaise's intervention,
Paula's musical career was again opened to her, would the current turn
that way? Would John be left stranded? Had Paula herself any misgivings
to this effect?

That she was deeply troubled about her present relation with John and in
general about John himself, would have been plain to a less penetrating
eye than Anthony's. There was no open quarrel between them. Wollaston
dropped into the music room sometimes, late in the afternoon, to ask how
the opera was getting along. His manner to March on these occasions was
one of, perhaps, slightly overwrought politeness, but the intention of it
did not seem hostile. Toward Paula he presented the image of humorous,
affectionate concern, the standard behavior of the perfect husband.

It was Paula, on these occasions, who gave the show away, betraying by a
self-conscious eagerness to make him welcome, the fact that he was not.
She made the mistake of telling him he looked tired and worried, facts
too glaringly true to be bandied about in the presence of a stranger. He
looked to March as if he were approaching the elastic limit of complete
exhaustion. That it looked pretty much like that to Paula herself was
made evident from the way she once spoke about him, her eyes full of
tears, after he had left the room.

"He's working so insanely hard," she said. "Nights as well as days. I
don't believe he's had five hours' consecutive sleep this week."

When March wanted to know why he did it, she hesitated, but gave him, at
last, a candid answer. No one else would have answered it at all.

"I don't think it can be because he feels he has to," she said. "To earn
the money, I mean. Of course, he's been buying a big farm, half of it,
for Rush. But he said the other day that if I needed any extra money for
this"--she nodded toward the score on the piano--"I was to let him know.
Of course, he isn't happy about it and I suppose it makes him take
things harder."

Naturally enough, March agreed with her here. John Wollaston was clearly
a member of the gold coast class. It wasn't thinkable that his financial
difficulties could be real. The unreality of them was, of course, the
measure of the genuineness of his fear of losing Paula,--of seeing the
main current of her life shift once more to its old channel. Did Paula
see that, March wondered? What was it she foresaw?

He got a partial answer one day in the course of one of their quarrels
about the opera. He had unguardedly given expression to his growing
despondency about it.

"This thing can't go," he had said. "It's getting more lifeless from week
to week. We're draining all the blood out of it and this stuff we're
putting in is sawdust."

She whipped round upon him in a sudden tempest. "It's got to go," she
said. "It's got to be made to go. If what you're putting into it is
sawdust, take it out. Put some heart into it."

He had been staring gloomily at the score. Now he turned away from it.
"That's what I don't seem able to do," he said.

She came up and took him by the shoulders so violently that it might
almost be said she shook him. "You can't let go like that. It's too late.
Everything I've got in the world is mixed up in it." She must have read
his unspoken thought there for she went on, "Oh, I suppose you'd say I'd
still have John if I did fail. Well, I wouldn't. He's mixed up in it,
too. He'd never forgive me if I failed. It's the fear I'll fail and make
myself look cheap and ridiculous that makes him hate it so. Well, I'm not
going to. Make up your mind to that!"

Later, when he was leaving, under a promise to improve some of the
passages they had been arguing about, she reverted to this aspect of the
matter and added something. "John can see what a failure would mean. But
what the other thing--the big real success--would mean to both of us, he
hasn't the faintest idea of. He won't till I get it."

"He's a famous person, himself, of course," March observed, not without a
gleam of mischief.

She echoed the word quite blankly, and he went on to amplify.

"That European Medical Commission that was out here a few weeks ago
attended some of his clinics in a body. I don't suppose there's a
first-class hospital anywhere in this country or in Europe where his name
isn't known. That operation he did on Sarah turned out to be a classic,
you know. He used a new technique in it which has become standard since."

But it seemed to him that she still looked incredulous when he went away,
incapable of really digesting that idea at all. No, he wouldn't have bet
much on the chance that any great success of hers could reunite them. The
love life that they had been enjoying this last five years hadn't thrown
out any radicles to bind them together--children for instance.

March wondered why there had been no children. He was not inclined to
accept the obvious explanation that she hadn't wanted any. She had spoken
once of her childlessness in a tone that didn't quite square with that
explanation. Nor had she said it quite as she would, had she felt that
her husband shared equally in her disappointment. It was all very
intangible, of course, just the way she inflected the sentence, "You see,
I haven't any children." Was it John that didn't want them? Well, he had
two of his own, of course. Had he shrunk from having this new passion of
his domesticated? And then he was a gynecologist. Was he, perhaps, afraid
for her? That explanation had a sort of plausibility about it for Anthony
March. If that were true, his caution had only brought him face to face
with a greater risk. March felt sorry for John Wollaston.

But it quite truly never occurred to him to hold himself in the smallest
degree responsible for the husband's troubles. To a man with a better
developed possessive sense, it might have occurred that he was poaching
in another's preserves. When a husband made it plain that he chose to
keep a particularly rare and valuable possession such as a wife like
Paula must be considered, in the tower of brass LaChaise had talked
about, it became the duty of every other well-disposed male to take pains
to leave no keys, rope ladders or files lying about by which she might
effect her escape. But a consideration of this sort would not even have
been intelligible to March, let alone troublesome.


CHAPTER X

AN INTERVENTION


Mary could not have described the thing there was about old Nat's manner
of going by her door that led her to halt him and inquire what he was up
to. One sees, sometimes, one of his children gliding very innocently
along toward the nearest way out with an effect of held breath that
prompts investigation. In this sixty-year old child, upon whom the terror
of John Wollaston's desperate illness lay more visibly than on any other
member of the household, this look of gusto was especially striking.
Mary's question was prompted by no more serious an impulse than to share
with him a momentary escape from the all-enveloping misery.

But she found old Nat unwilling to share his source of satisfaction with
her. He protested, indeed, with an air of deeply aggrieved innocence,
that nothing of the sort existed. A man was waiting now in the lower hall
who had come to make the customary inquiries. Nat had conveyed them to
Paula and was returning with her answer. This was so flagrantly
disingenuous that Mary smiled.

"Who is the man?" she asked.

The old servant shuffled his feet. "It's that good-for-nothing piano
tuner, Miss Mary," he told her reluctantly. "I reckon you don't know much
about him. He's been coming around a lot since you've been away. He's
been sticking to Miss Paula like a leech, right up to the day your father
got sick. Then he didn't come any more and I thought we were done with
him. But he came back to-day and asked me if Miss Paula was up in the
music room. He'd have gone right straight up to that room where Doctor
John is fighting for his life if I hadn't stopped him."

"Did you tell him father was ill?" she asked, and was astonished at the
flare of passion this evoked from him.

"It ain't no business of his, Miss Mary," he said grimly. "Nothing about
this family is any business of his." Then as if anxious to prevent the
significance of that from reaching her, he hurried on. "He was so sure
Miss Paula wanted to see him, I told him if he'd wait, I'd inform her
that he was here. I've done told her and she said he was to go away. She
couldn't be bothered with him. And then she said to me with tears in her
eyes, 'I wish I'd never seen him, Nat.' Those were her words, Miss Mary.
'I wish my eyes had never beheld him!' That's what she said to me not a
minute ago. I'm going down to fix him so she'll never see him again."

"You needn't go down," Mary said decisively. "I'll see him myself."

She had got home that morning summoned by a telegram, one of those
carefully composed encouraging telegrams that are a simple distillate of
despair. During the three days it had taken to accomplish her journey
from the ranch, she had gradually relinquished all hope of finding her
father alive. Rush, who met the train, had reassured her. It was a bad
case of double pneumonia. They were expecting the crisis within
twenty-four hours. The doctors gave him an even chance, but the boy was
more confident. "They don't know dad," he said. "He isn't going to die."

On the way back to the house he had outlined the facts for her. His
father had driven out to the farm in his open roadster a week ago Sunday
to see how he and Graham were getting on--driven out alone, though he had
spoken the night before, over the telephone, of bringing Paula with him.
For some reason that hadn't come off. Dad had seemed well enough, then,
though rather tired and dispirited. The day had begun as if it meant to
be fine, for a change, but it had turned off cold again and begun to rain
while they were walking over the place. His father, he was afraid, had
got pretty wet. When they got back to the farm-house they found a
telephone message urgently summoning him to town, and he had driven away,
in the open car, without changing.

Rush had meant to telephone but had neglected this--they were terribly
busy, of course, trying to get things done without any labor to do them
with. He had come home Wednesday, on a promise to Graham's kid sister
that he would attend a school dance of hers. He had dressed at home but
not dined there and had seen nothing of his father until very late, about
two o'clock in the morning, when he noticed a light in his room as he
passed on the way to his own.

"I don't know why I stopped," he said. "He was talking and his voice
didn't sound natural, not as if he was telephoning nor talking to any
one in the room, either. He was trying to telephone--to the hospital to
send an ambulance for him. He hadn't any breath at all, even then, and
the thermometer he'd been taking his temperature with read a hundred
and four."

"But--the _hospital_?"

"I know," Rush agreed. "It's pretty rum. He stuck to it. Wanted to be got
straight out of the house without rousing anybody. He was a little bit
delirious, of course. I agreed to it to pacify him, but I telephoned
straight to Doctor Darby and he told me not to do anything till he got
around. It wasn't more than ten minutes before he came. Paula had roused
by that time, and she persuaded Darby against the hospital. She suggested
the music room herself and as soon as he saw it he said it was just the
place. They've got a regular hospital rigged up for him there and two men
nurses. But the main person on the job is Paula herself. The two men keep
watch and watch, but she's there practically all the time. They say she
hasn't slept in more than half-hour snatches since that first night. She
won't let any of us come near him--and Darby backs her up. The doctors
are all crazy about her. Say it'll be her doing if dad pulls through.
Well--she'd better make it!"

There wasn't time to explore the meaning of that last remark for they
were then pulling up at the door. She laid it aside for future reference,
however. She was so fortunate as to meet Doctor Darby on the stairs and
so to get at once the latest and most authoritative report.

He brightened at the sight of her but she thought he didn't look very
hopeful. He said though, that he believed her father was going to get
well. "Medically, he hasn't more than an even chance. He hasn't much
fight in him somehow. But that stepmother of yours means to pull him
through. She doesn't mean to be beaten and I don't believe she will be.
I've never seen the equal of her. It shows they're born, not made. She's
never had, your aunt assures me, any nursing experience whatever."

Mary thought she detected a twinkle in Darby's eye over this mention of
Aunt Lucile, but it was gone before she could make sure.

"You're to go up and see him for five minutes," he went on. "Paula's
keeping a look-out for you. He mustn't be allowed to talk, of course, but
she wants him to know you're back. She has an idea, and she's probably
right, that he is worrying about you."

"What is there that I can do?" she asked. "To help, I mean."

"Hope," he told her bluntly. "Pray if you can. Cheer up your aunt a bit,
if possible; she's in despair. Only don't try to take away any of her
occupations. That's about all."

"In other words, nothing," she commented.

"Well, none of us can do much more than that," he said, "excepting
always, Paula."

It was not until she had spent that heart-tearing five minutes at her
father's bedside, while she talked cheerful little encouraging futilities
in a voice dry with the effort she had to make to keep it from breaking,
that she saw her aunt--and felt grateful for Doctor Darby's warning. Mary
had never thought of Lucile before as an old woman, but she seemed more
than that now,--broken and, literally, in despair--of her brother's life.
And beyond this there was a bitterness which Mary could not, at first,
account for.

"Paula, I hear, has allowed you to see him. For five minutes! Well, that
is more than she has allowed me. Or any of us. It was a chance for
showing off, I suppose, that was more than she could resist."

"I was a little afraid it might be that," Mary admitted. "Afraid of
finding her--carefully costumed for the part, you know. But she wasn't.
She didn't come into the room with me at all; just told me not to show I
was shocked by the way he looked and not to let him talk. And she seemed
glad I was back; not for me but because it might help him. It seems a
miracle that he's still alive, after almost a week of that, and I guess
it is she who has done it. They all say so."

"Men!" the old woman cried fiercely. "All men! The two nurses as well.
There's something about her that makes idiots of all of them. She knows
it. And she revels in it. It's the breath of life to her. She has played
fast and loose with your father's happiness for it. And now she's playing
with his life as well. And feeling, all the while, that it is a very
noble repentance!"

"Repentance for what?" Mary asked. "Rush said something like that. I
thought, before I went away, that father was getting reconciled to the
Ravinia idea. Do you think it was worrying about ..."

"No, I don't," Lucile interrupted shortly. "Your father was exposed,
soaking wet, to a cold north wind, while he was driving forty miles in an
open car. That's the reason he took pneumonia. And it's the only reason.
I don't know what Rush may have been saying to you, but I've known your
father ever since he was born, and I can tell you that Paula might have
gone on making a fool of herself to the end of time without his dying of
it. He was--fond of her, I will admit. But he had a life of his own that
she knows nothing about. He was too proud to tell her about it, and she
hadn't wit enough to see it for herself. That's the truth, and this
emotional sprawl she's indulging in now doesn't change it.--Meanwhile,
she is adding to her collection five new men!"

"I don't believe," said Mary quietly, "that there is one of them she
knows exists. Or wouldn't poison," she added with a smile, "to improve
father's chance of getting well."

This won a nod of grim assent. "There are plenty of them. She could
replace them easily enough. But her hunger for their worship is
insatiable. For a while your father's--infatuation satisfied her. She may
have tried to pull herself up to his level. I dare say she did. But even
at that time she could not abide Wallace Hood, though he was kindness
itself to her, simply because he kept his head. Unfortunately, this poor
young musician was not able to keep his."

It seemed to Mary, even when allowance was made for the bitterness of the
desperate old woman, who then went on for the better part of an hour with
her bill of particulars, that this must be true. Paula must have lost her
head, at any rate. What Mary herself had seen the beginning of, must
have gone on at an accelerated speed until it was beyond all bounds.
There had been few hours when March might not come to the house and none
to which he did not stay. There were whole days when Paula was hardly out
of his company. She took him about with her to people's houses. She
talked about him when she went alone. Those who had at first not known
what to think, at last had come to believe that there was only one thing
they could.

"I tried to suggest to her, quite early, before it had gone so far, that
she was in danger of being misunderstood. It only made her furious. And
John was hardly less so when I mentioned to him that I had spoken to her.
He would see nothing; kept a face of granite through it all."

"Aunt Lucile," Mary asked, after a little silence, "do you think she has
really been--unfaithful to father?"

Miss Wollaston hesitated. "Should you consider the conduct I have
described, to be an example of fidelity?"

"I mean, in the divorce court sense," Mary persisted.

"That," her aunt said, more nearly in her old manner than anything that
Mary had yet seen--"that is a matter upon which I have no opinion."

It was a possibility that Mary had contemplated as early as that first
night of all, when Paula, having sung his song, had come herself to
find him in Annie's old bedroom where she had him hidden and with a
broken laugh had pulled him up in her arms and kissed him, unaware that
she was not alone with him. One kiss, as an isolated phenomenon, didn't
mean much, Mary allowed, but when a man and a woman who were going to
be left alone together a lot, started off that way, they were likely
to--get somewhere. And where the man was the composer of that love song
and the woman the singer of it, it was almost a foregone conclusion
that they would.

But this was not the conclusion that she had come to when she stopped
old Nat on his way down-stairs to turn March out of the house. The
evidence, Rush's and Aunt Lucile's, might seem to point that way but it
didn't, somehow, make a convincing picture. I think, though, that in any
case, she would have gone down to see him.

He had found himself a seat on a black oak settee in the hall around the
corner of the stairs and his attitude, when she came upon him, was very
like what it had been the other time, bent forward a little, his hands
between his knees, as if he were braced for something.

"Mrs. Wollaston won't be able to see you to-day," she said. He sprang to
his feet and she added instantly, "I'm her stepdaughter, Mary Wollaston.
Won't you come in?" Without waiting for an answer, she turned and led the
way into the drawing-room.

So far it had been rehearsed, on her way down-stairs, even to the chair
in the bow window which she indicated, having seated herself, for him to
sit down in. She had up to that point an extraordinarily buoyant sense of
self-possession. This left her for one panicky instant when she felt him
looking at her a little incredulously as if, once more, he wondered
whether she were really there.

"I think, perhaps, you haven't heard of father's illness," she began--not
just as she had expected to. "Or did you come to ask about him?"

"No," he said. "I hadn't heard. Is it--yes, of course it must
be--serious. I'm sorry."

She was struck by the instantaneous change in his manner. From being,
part of him, anyhow, a little remote--wool-gathering would have been Aunt
Lucile's term--he was, vividly, here. It wasn't possible to doubt the
reality of his concern. As a consequence, when she began informing him of
the state of things she found herself pulled away, more and more, from
the impersonal phraseology of a medical bulletin. She told how the attack
had come on; how they had put up a bed for him in the music room, where
there was the most air, and begun what it was evident from the first
would be a life-and-death struggle; she quoted what Rush had told her
when he met the train. "I agree with Rush," she concluded. "They let me
see him, for a few minutes, this morning, just so he'd know that I had
come back. Yet it isn't possible not to believe that he will get well."

When she had squeezed away the tears that had dimmed her eyes, she saw
that his own were bright with them. "He's more than just a great man," he
said gravely. Then, after a moment's silence, "If there's anything I can
do... It would be a great privilege to be of service to him. As errand
boy, any sort of helper. I had some hospital experience at Bordeaux."

It was, on the face of it, just such an offer as any kindly disposed
inquirer would have made. Such as Wallace Hood, for example, had, in
fact, made, only rather more eloquently less than an hour ago. But Mary's
impulse was not to answer as she had answered Wallace with a mere polite
acknowledgment of helpless good intentions. In fact, she could find, for
the moment, no words in which to answer him at all.

He said then, "I mustn't keep you."

Even in response to that she made no movement of release. "There's
nothing, even for me to do," she said, and felt from the look this drew
from him that he must, incredibly, have caught from her some inkling of
what her admission really meant.

He did not repeat his move to go, nor speak, and there was silence
between them for, perhaps, the better part of a minute. It was
terminated, startlingly, for her, by her brother's appearance in the
doorway. He had on his raincoat and carried his hat and an umbrella in
his hands.

"Mary, I'm just going out" ... he began, then broke off short, stared,
and came on into the room. March rose, but Mary, after one glance at
Rush's face, sat back a little more deeply in her seat. Rush ignored her
altogether.

"My sister has been away during the last few weeks," he said to March. It
had, oddly, the effect of a set speech. "If she had not been, I'm sure
she would have told you, as I do now ..." He stumbled there, evidently
from the sudden blighting sense that he was talking like an actor--or an
ass. "This isn't the time for you to come here," he went on. "This house
isn't the place for you to come. When my father's well enough to take
matters into his own hands again, he'll do as he sees fit. For the
present you will have to consider that I'm acting for him."

Mary's eyes during the whole of that speech never wavered from March's
face. There was nothing in it at all at first but clear astonishment, but
presently there came a look of troubled concern that gave her an impulse
to smile. Evidently it disconcerted her brother heavily for at the end of
an appalling silence, not long enough however, to allow March to get his
wits together for a reply, Rush turned about abruptly and strode from the
room. A moment later they heard the house door close behind him.

The two in the drawing-room were left looking at each other. Then,
"Please sit down again," she said.


CHAPTER XI

NOT COLLECTABLE


The effect of Rush's interruption was rather that of a thunderclap,
hardly more. Recalling it, Mary remembered having looked again into
March's face as the street door banged shut to see whether he was
laughing. She herself was sharply aware of the comic effect of her
brother's kicking himself out of the house instead of his intended
victim, but she could not easily have forgiven a sign of such awareness
from March.

He had betrayed none, had tried, she thought--his amazement and concern
had rendered him pretty near inarticulate--to tell her what the look in
his face had already made evident even to Rush; his innocence not only of
any amorous intent toward Paula but even of the possibility that any one
could have interpreted the relation between them in that way. He might
have managed some such repudiation as that had she not cut across his
effort with an apology for her brother.

It had been a terrible week for them all, she said. Especially for Rush
and for his Aunt Lucile, who had been here from the beginning. Even the
few hours since her own return this morning had been enough to teach her
how nearly unendurable that sort of helplessness was.

It must have been in this connection that he told her what had not got
round to her before, the case of his sister Sarah whom they had watched
as one condemned to death until John Wollaston came and saved her. "He
simply wouldn't be denied," March said. "He was all alone; even his
colleagues didn't agree with him. And my father, having decided that she
was going to die and that this must, therefore, be the will of God,
didn't think it ought to be tampered with.

"I remember your father said to him, 'Man, the will of God this morning
is waiting to express itself in the skill of my hands,' and it didn't
sound like blasphemy either. He carried father off in his apron, just as
he was, to the hospital and I went along. I scraped an acquaintance
afterward with one of the students who had been there in the theatre
watching him operate and got him to tell me about it. They felt it was a
historic occasion even at the time; cheered him at the end of it. And
that sort of virtuosity does seem worthier of cheers than any scraping of
horsehair over cat-gut could ever come to. I wonder how many lives there
are to-day that owe themselves altogether to him just as my sister
does.--How many children who never could have been born at all except for
his skill and courage. Because, of course, courage is half of it."

Upon Mary the effect of this new portrait of her father was electrifying;
eventually was more than that--revolutionary. These few words of March's
served, I think, in the troubled, turbid emotional relation she had got
into with her father, as a clarifying precipitant.

But that process was slower; the immediate effect attached to March
himself. The present wonder was that it should have been he, a stranger,
equipped with only the meagerest chances for observation, who, turning
his straying search-light beam upon the dearest person to her in the
world, should thus have illuminated him anew. Even after he had gone it
was the man rather than the things he had said that she thought about.

Amazingly, he had guessed--she was sure she had given him no hint--at the
part Paula was playing in their domestic drama. It had come pat upon what
he had told her of the lives her father had plucked from the hand of
death, the ironic, "he saved others, himself he can not save," hanging
unspoken in their thoughts.

"Paula will be fighting for his life," he said. "Magnificently. That must
be one of your hopes."

She had confirmed this with details. She got the notion, perhaps from
nothing more than his rather thoughtful smile, that he comprehended the
whole thing, even down to Aunt Lucile. Though wasn't there a phrase of
his,--"these uninhibited people, when it comes to getting things _done_
..." that slanted that way? Did that mean that he was one of the other
sort? Wasn't your ability to recognize the absence of a quality or a
disability in any one else, proof enough that you had it yourself? It
would never, certainly, occur to Paula to think of any one as
"uninhibited."

But the opposed adjective didn't fit him. She couldn't see him at all as
a person tangled, helpless, in webs of his own spinning;--neither the man
who had written that love song nor the man who had sat down in his chair
again after Rush had slammed the door.

He wasn't even shy but he was, except for that moment when a vivid
concern over John Wollaston's illness brought him back, oddly remote,
detached. He might have been a Martian, when in response to her leading
he discussed Paula with her; how good a musician she was; how splendidly
equipped physically and temperamentally for an operatic career. "She has
abandoned all that now, I suppose," he said. "Everything that goes with
it. She would wish, if she ever gave us a thought, that LaChaise and I
had never been born."

Mary would have tried to deny this but that the quality and tone of his
voice told her that he really knew it and that, miraculously, he didn't
care. She had exclaimed with a sincerity struck out of her by amazement,
"I don't see how you know that."

"Paula's a conqueror," he had answered simply, "a--compeller. It's her
instinct to compel. That's what makes her the artist she is. Without her
voice she might have been a tamer of wild beasts. And, of course, a great
audience that has paid extravagantly for its pleasure is a wild beast,
that will purr if she compels it, snarl at her if she doesn't manage to.
She's been hissed, howled at. And that's the possibility that makes
cheers intoxicating. Left too long without something to conquer, she
feels in a vacuum, smothered. Well, she's got something now; the greatest
thing in the world to her,--her husband's life. She's flung off the other
thing like a cloak."

Without, at the moment, any sense of its being an extraordinary question,
Mary asked, "Are you glad? That she has forgotten you, I mean."

She was not able, thinking it over afterward, to recall anything that
could have served as a cue for so far-fetched a supposition as that. It
could have sprung from nothing more palpable than the contrast suggested
between Paula, the compeller, the _dompteuse_, and the man who had just
been so describing her. He was so very thin; he was, if one looked
closely, rather shabby, and beyond that, it had struck her that a haggard
air there was about him was the product of an advanced stage of
fatigue,--or hunger. But that of course, was absurd. Anyhow, not even the
sound of her question startled her.

Nor did it him. There was something apologetic about his smile. "It _is_
a reprieve," he admitted. "I left her a week ago," he went on to
explain,--"it must have been the day Doctor Wollaston fell ill--on a
promise not to come back until I had got this opera of mine into the
shape she wants. I came back to-day to tell her that it can't be
done--not by me. I have tried my utmost and it isn't enough. I haven't
improved it even from her point of view let alone from mine. She isn't an
easy person to come to with a confession of failure."

"She's spoiling it," Mary said. "Why do you let her?"

But March dissented from that. "If we agree that the thing's an
opera--and of course that's what it is if it's anything--then what she
wants it made over into is better than what I wrote. She's trying to put
the Puccini throb into it. She's trying to make better drama out of it.
LaChaise agrees with her. He said at the beginning that I relied too much
on the orchestra and didn't give the singers enough to do. And, of
course, it's easy to see that what a woman like Paula said or did would
be more important to an audience than anything that an oboe could
possibly say. When I'm with her, she--galvanizes me into a sort of belief
that I can accomplish the thing she wants, but when I go off alone and
try to do it...." He blinked and shook his head. "It has been a
first-class nightmare, for a fact, this last week."

But Mary demanded again. "Why do you let her?"

"I made a good resolution a while ago," he said. "It was--it was the
night she sang those Whitman songs. You see I've never been tied to
anything; harnessed, you know. Somehow, I've managed to do without. But
I've had to do without hearing, except in my own head, any of the music
I've written. There was an old tin trunk full of it, on paper, that
looked as if it was never going to be anywhere else. Well, I came to a
sort of conviction after I went away from here that night, that those two
facts were cause and effect; that unless I submitted to be harnessed I
never would hear any of it. And it seemed that night that I couldn't
manage to do without hearing it. Keats was wrong about that, you
know,--about unheard melodies being sweeter. They can come to be clear
torment. So I decided I'd begin going in harness. I suppose it was rather
naive of me to think that I could, all at once, make a change like that.
Anyhow, I found I couldn't go on with this. I brought it around
to-day,--it's out there in the hall--to turn it over to Paula to do with
as she liked. That's why it was so--incredible, when you came down the
stairs instead."

He sprang up then to go, so abruptly that he gave her the impression of
having abandoned in the middle, the sentence he was speaking. This time,
however, rising instantly, she released him and in a moment he was gone.
There had been a word from him about her father, the expression of
"confident hopes" for his recovery, and on her part some attempt, not
successfully brought off she feared, to assure him of his welcome when he
came again. She didn't shake hands with him and decided afterward that it
must have been he who had avoided it.

She was glad to have him go so quickly. She wanted him to go so that she
could think about him. It was with a rather buoyant movement that she
crossed the room to the piano bench and very lightly with her finger-tips
began stroking the keys, the cool smooth keys with their orderly
arrangement of blacks and whites, from which it was possible to weave
such infinitely various patterns, such mysterious tissue.

A smile touched her lips over the memory of the picture her fancy had
painted the night Paula sang his songs, the sentimental notion of Paula's
inspiring him with an occasional facile caress to the writing of other
love songs. She might have been a boarding-school girl to have thought of
that. She smiled, too, though a little more tenderly, over his own
attempt--naive he had called it--to go in harness, like a park hack,
submissive to Paula's rein and spur. Pegasus at the plow again. She
smiled in clear self-derision over her contemplated project of saving
him from Paula. He didn't need saving from anybody. He was one of those
spirits that couldn't be tied. Not even his own best effort of submission
could avail to keep the harness on his back.

It was most curious how comfortable she had been with him. During the
miserable month she had spent at home before she went to Wyoming with the
Corbetts, she had dreaded a second encounter with March and had
consciously avoided one. To meet and be introduced as the strangers they
were supposed by the rest of the family to be, to elaborate the pretense
that this was what they were--they who had shared those flaming moments
while Paula sang!--would be ridiculous and disgusting. But anything else,
any attempt to go on from where they had left off was unthinkable. In the
privacy of her imagination she had worked the thing out in half a dozen
ways, all equally distressing.

She had not made good her resolution to quit thinking about him. She was
not able and did not even attempt to dismiss her adventure with him as a
mere regrettable folly to be forgotten as soon as possible. It had often
come back to her during sleepless hours of the long nights and had always
been made welcome. She didn't wish it defaced as she had felt it
necessarily must be by the painful anti-climax of a second meeting.

The impulse upon which she had taken him out of old Nat's hands was
perhaps a little surprising now she looked back on it, but it had not
astonished her at the time. Of course, there, there was something
concretely to be done, an injustice to be averted from a possibly
innocent head. She doubted though if it had been pure altruism.

Whatever its nature, the result of it had been altogether happy. She
_was_ glad she had come down to see him. There need be no misgiving now
about the quality of their future encounters, were there to be any such.
They were on solid ground with each other.

How had that been brought about? How had they managed to talk to each
other for anyway fifteen or twenty minutes without either a reference to
their adventure or a palpable avoidance of it? It wasn't her doing. From
the moment when she got to the end of the lines she had rehearsed coming
down the stairs, the lead had been in his hands. Indeed, to the latter
part of the talk, what she had contributed was no more than a question or
two so flagrantly personal that they reminded her in review of some of
her childish indiscretions with Wallace Hood. How had he managed it?

He hadn't been tactful. She acquitted him altogether of that. She
couldn't have endured tact this afternoon from anybody. Of course, the
mere expressiveness of his face helped a lot. The look he had turned on
Rush for example, that had stopped that nerve-racked boy in full career.
Or the look he gave her when he first learned of her father's illness.
That sudden coming back from whatever his own preoccupation might have
been to a vivid concern for her father.

Well, there, at last, it was. That was his quality. A genius for more
than forgetting himself, for stepping clean out of himself into some one
else's shoes. Wasn't that just a long way of saying imagination? He had
illuminated her father for her and in so doing had given her a ray of
real comfort. He had interpreted Paula--in terms how different from those
employed by Aunt Lucile! He had comprehended Rush without one momentary
flaw of resentment. Last of all, he had quite simply and without one
vitiating trace of self-pity, explained himself, luminously, so that it
was as if she had known him all her life.

One thing, to be sure, she didn't in the least understand--the very
last thing he had said. "That's why it was so incredible when you came
down the stairs instead." That had been to her, a complete non sequitur,
an enigma. But she was content to leave it at that.

Such a man, of course, could never--belong to anybody. He was not
collectable. There would always be about him, for everybody, some last
enigma, some room to which no one would be given the key. But there was a
virtue even in the fringe of him, the hem of his garment.

Was she getting sentimental? No, she was not. Indeed, precisely what his
little visit had done for her was to effect her release from a tangle of
taut-drawn sentimentalities. She hadn't felt as free as this, as
comfortable with herself, since she came home with Rush from New York.

She had no assurance that he'd come to the house again of his own accord
or that Paula would send for him. But she was in no mood to distress
herself just now, even with that possibility.

She crossed the room and got herself a cigarette, and with it alight she
returned to her contemplation of the piano keyboard. She didn't move nor
speak when she heard Rush come in but she kept an eye on the drawing-room
door and when presently he entered, she greeted him with a smile of
good-humored mockery. He had something that looked like a battered school
atlas in his hand.

"What do you suppose this is?" he asked. "It was lying on the bench in
the hall."

She held out a hand for it and together they opened it on the lid of the
piano and investigated.

"It's the manuscript of his opera," she said. "He brought it around to
leave with Paula. To tell her he had done with it. He's been trying to
spoil it for her but he can't."

"I suppose I made an infernal fool of myself," he remarked, after a
little silence.

She blew, for answer, an impudent smoke ring up into his face.

He continued grumpily to cover his relief that she had not been more
painfully explicit,--"I suppose I shall have to make up some sort of
damned apology to him."

"I don't know," she said. "That's as you like. I don't believe he'd
insist upon it. He understood well enough."

He looked at her intently. "Has there been any better news from father
since I went out?" he asked.

She shook her head. "Except that there's been none. Every hour now that
we aren't sent for counts. What made you think there might have been?"

He said he didn't know. She looked a little more cheerful somehow,
less--tragic. Evidently her visit to the Corbetts had done her good.

His eye fell once more on the manuscript. "Did he go off and forget
that?" he asked. "Or did he mean to leave it for Paula? And what shall we
do with it,--hand it over to her or send it back?"

Thoughtfully Mary straightened the sheets and closed the cover. "I'll
take care of it for him," she said.


CHAPTER XII

HICKORY HILL


Pneumonia, for all it is characterized by what is called a crisis, has no
single stride to recovery, no critical moment when one who has been in
peril passes to safety. Steinmetz and Darby were determined that Mary and
all the household should understand this fully. She had waylaid them in
the hall as they were leaving the house together--this was seventy-two
hours or so after Anthony March's call--and demanded the good news she
was sure they had for her. There was a look about them and a tone in
their voices that were perfectly new.

They would not be persuaded to say that her father was out of danger.
There was very little left of him. His heart had been over-strained and
this abnormal effect was now, in due course, transferred to the kidneys.
All sorts of deadly sequellae were lying in ambush.

But the more discouraging they were, the more she beamed upon them. She
walked along with them to the door, slipping her arm inside Doctor
Darby's as she did so. "If you only knew," she said, "what a wonderful
thing it is to have the doctors stop being encouraging and try to
frighten you, instead. Because that means you really do think he's
getting well."

"The balance of probability has swung to that side," Steinmetz admitted
in his rather affected staccato. "At all events he's out of my beat." His
beat was the respiratory tract and his treatment the last word in
vaccines and serums.

She held Darby back a little. "Must we go on feeling," she asked,
"that anything could happen any minute? Or--well, could Rush go back
to the farm? Graham Stannard has gone to New York, I think, they're
partners, you know, so he must be rather badly wanted. And this
waiting is hard for him."

Rush could go, of course, Darby assured her. "For that matter," he went
on with a quick glance at her, "why don't you go with him? Take your aunt
along, too. For a few days, at least. You couldn't do better."

She demurred to this on the ground that it didn't seem fair to Paula. If
there was a period of Arcadian retirement down on the books for anybody,
it was Paula who was entitled to it.

But Paula, as Darby pointed out, wouldn't take it in the first place,
and, surprisingly, didn't need it in the second. "She told me just now
that she'd slept eighteen hours out of the last twenty-four and was ready
for anything. She looked it, too."

He understood very well her irrepressible shrug of exasperation at that
and interrupted her attempt to explain it. "It's another breed of animal
altogether," he said. "And at that, I'd rather have had her job than
yours. You're looking first rate, anyhow. But your aunt, if she isn't to
break up badly, had better be carried off somewhere." He glanced around
toward Steinmetz who had withdrawn out of ear-shot. "There are some
toxins, you know," he added, "that are even beyond him and his
microscopes."

Mary had meant to broach this project at dinner but changed her mind and
waited until Aunt Lucile had withdrawn and she and Rush were left alone
over their coffee cups for a smoke.

"Poor Aunt Lucile! She has aged years in the last three weeks. And it
shows more, now the nightmare is over, than it did before."

"Is it over? Really?" he asked.

"Well, we don't need miracles any more for him. Just ordinary good care
and good luck. Yes, I'd say the nightmare was over."

"Leaving us free," he commented, "to go back to our own."

"You can go back to the farm, anyhow," she said. "I asked Doctor Darby,
especially, and he said so. He wants me to go along with you and take
Aunt Lucile. Just for a week or so. Is there any sort of place with a
roof over it where we could stay?"

He said, "I guess that could be managed." But his tone was so absent and
somber that she looked at him in sharp concern.

"You didn't mean that the farm was your nightmare, did you?" she asked.
"Has something gone terribly wrong out there?"

"Things have gone just the way I suppose anybody but a fool would have
known they would. Not worse than that, I guess."

He got up then and went over to the sideboard, coming back with a
decanter of old brandy and a pair of big English glasses. She declined
hers as unobtrusively as possible, just with a word and a faint shake of
the head. But it was enough to make him look at her.

"You didn't drink anything at dinner, either, did you?" he asked.

She flushed as she said, "I don't think I'm drinking, at all, just now."

"Being an example to anybody?" he asked suspiciously.

She smiled at that and patted his hand. "Oh, no, my dear. I've enough to
do to be an example to myself. I liked the way it was out at the
Corbetts'. They've gone bone-dry. And,--oh, please don't think that I'm a
prig--I am a little better without it--just now, anyway. Tell me what's
gone wrong at the farm."

"This is wonderful stuff," he said, cupping the fragile glass in his two
hands and inhaling the bouquet from the precious liquor in the bottom of
it. "It's good for nightmares, at any rate." After a sip or two, he
attempted to answer her question.

"Oh, I suppose we'll come out all right, eventually. Of course, we've got
to. But I wish Martin Whitney had done one thing or the other; either
shown a little real confidence and enthusiasm in the thing or else
stepped on it and refused to lend father the money."

"Lend?" Mary asked. "Did he have to borrow it?"

He dealt rather impatiently with that question. "You don't keep sixty or
eighty thousand dollars lying around loose in a checking account," he
said. "Of course, he had to borrow it. But he borrowed it of Whitney,
worse luck--and Whitney being an old friend, pulls a long face over it
whenever we find we need a little more than the original figures showed.
That's enough to give any one cold feet right there.

"Graham's father is rich, of course, but he's tighter than the bark on a
tree. He's gone his limit and he won't stand for anything more. He can't
see that a farm like that is nothing but a factory and that you can't run
it for any profit that's worth while without the very best possible
equipment. He wanted us to pike along with scrub stock and the old tools
and buildings that were on the place and pay for improvements out of our
profits. Of course, the answer to that was that there wouldn't be any
profits. A grade cow these days simply can't earn her keep with the price
of feed and labor what it is. We didn't figure the cost of tools and
modern buildings high enough--there _was_ such a devil of a lot of
necessary things that we didn't figure on at all--and the consequence
was that we didn't put a big enough mortgage on the place. Nowhere near
what it would stand. And now that we want to put a second one on, Mr.
Stannard howls like a wolf."

The mere sound of the word mortgage made Mary's heart sink. She looked so
woebegone that Rush went on hastily.

"Oh, that'll come out in the wash. It's nothing to worry about really,
because even on the basis of a bigger investment than we had any idea of
making when we went in, it figures a peach of a profit. There's no
getting away from that. That's not the thing about it that's driving
Graham and me to drink."

He stopped on that phrase, not liking the sound of it, and in doubt about
asking her not to take it literally. She saw all that as plainly as if
she had been looking through an open window into his mind. He took
another deliberate sip of the brandy, instead, and then went on.

"Why, it's the way things don't happen; the way we can't get
anything done."

He did not see the sympathetic hand she stretched out to him; went back
to the big brandy glass instead, for another long luxurious inhalation
and a small sip or two. "It's partly our own fault, of course," he went
on, presently. "We've made some fool mistakes. But it isn't our mistakes
that are going to beat us, it's the damned bull-headed incompetence of
the so-called labor we've got to deal with."

He ruminated over that in silence for a minute or two. "They talk about
the inefficiency of the army," he exclaimed, "but I've been four years in
two armies and I'll say that if what we've found out at Hickory Hill is a
fair sample of civilian efficiency, I'll take the army way every time.
There are days when I feel as if I'd like to quit;--go out West and get
a job roping steers for Bob Corbett, even if he is bone-dry."

She thought if he played any longer with that brandy glass she must cry
out, but he drained it this time and pushed it away. With an effort of
will she relaxed her tight muscles.

"I suppose I must have looked to you like a hopeless slacker," he said,
"or you wouldn't have asked Darby to send me back to work. No,--I didn't
mean to put it that way. I look like one to myself, that's all, when I
stop to think. Only you don't know how it has felt, this last six weeks,
to go on getting tighter and tighter in your head until you feel as if
you were going to burst. I went out and got drunk, once,--just plain,
deliberately boiled--in order to let off steam. It did me good, too, for
the time being."

She didn't look shocked at that as he had expected her to--gave him only
a rather wry smile and a comprehending nod. "We're all alike; that's the
trouble with us," she said. "But you will take us out to Hickory Hill,
won't you? Aunt Lucile and I. I'll promise we won't be in the way nor
make you any more work."

She saw he was hesitating and added, "At that, perhaps, I may be some
good. I could cook anyhow and I suppose I could be taught to milk a cow
and run a Ford."

He laughed at that, then said a little uncomfortably that this wasn't
what he had been thinking about. "I suppose you're counting on Graham's
being in New York. He isn't. At least, he telegraphed me that he'd be
back at Hickory Hill to-morrow morning. I knew you'd been rather keeping
away from him and I thought perhaps..."

"No, that's all right." She said it casually enough, but it drew a keen
look of inquiry from him, nevertheless. "Oh, nothing," she went on. "I
mean I haven't made up with him. Of course, I never quarreled with him
as far as that went. Only it's what I meant when I said just now that we
were all alike, father and you and I. We all get so ridiculously--tight
about things. Well, I've managed to let off steam myself."

He patted her hand approvingly. "That trip to Wyoming did you a lot of
good," he observed.--"Or something did."

"They're wonderfully easy people to live with, Olive and Bob," she said.
"They're immensely in love with each other I suppose, but without somehow
being offensive about it. And they have such a lot of fun. Olive has a
piebald cayuse, that she's taught all the _haute ecole_ tricks. He does
the statuesque poses and all the high action things just as seriously as
a thoroughbred and he's so short and homely and in such deadly earnest
about it that you can hardly bear it. You laugh yourself into stitches
but you want to cry too. And Bob says he's going to train a mule the same
way. If he ever does that pair will be worth a million dollars to any
circus.--Well, we'll be doing things like that out at Hickory Hill some
day. Because there is such a thing as fun left in the world."

"We'll have some of it this week," he agreed, and in this rather
light-headed spirit they arranged details.

The only building at Hickory Hill that had been designed for human
habitation was the farm-house and it was at present fully occupied and
rather more by a camp cook and his assistant, the farm manager and half
a dozen hands. The partners themselves slept in a tent. There was also a
cook tent near the house where three meals a day were prepared for
everybody, including the carpenters, masons, concrete men and well
diggers who were working on the new buildings. They drove out in Fords
from two or three near-by towns in time for breakfast and didn't go home
till after supper. The wagon shed of the old horse barn served as a
mess hall.

There were some beds, though, two or three spare ones, Rush was sure,
that had never been used. Given a day's start on his guests, he would
promise some sort of building which, if they would refrain from inquiring
too closely into its past, should serve to house them.

"A wood-shed," she suggested helpfully, "or a nicely swept-out hennery.
Even a former cow stable, at a pinch. Only not a pig-pen."

"If our new hog-house were only finished, you could be absolutely
palatial in it. But I think I can do better than any of those. You leave
that to me.--Only, how about Aunt Lucile? She's--essential to the scheme,
I suppose. Can you deliver her?"

"She'll come if it's put to her right,--as a sporting proposition.
She really is a good sport you know, the dear old thing. You leave
her to me."

"Lord, I feel a lot better than I did when I sat down to dinner," he told
her when they parted for the night, and left her reflecting on the folly
of making mountains out of mole-hills.


CHAPTER XIII

LOW HANGS THE MOON


He broke his promise to be waiting for them Friday morning at the farm.
It was Graham who caught sight of their car, as it stopped in front of
the farm-house, and came plunging down the bank to greet them and explain
how unavoidable it had been that Rush should go to Elgin.

He was somewhat flushed and a little out of breath but he seemed, after
the first uncomfortable minute, collected enough. He mounted the
running-board and directed the chauffeur to drive on across the bridge
and fork to the right with the main road up to a small nondescript
building on the far side of it.

It was a part of the farm, he explained, indicating the wilderness off to
the left,--a part of what must once have been a big apple orchard.
Indeed, exploring it yesterday for the first time, he had found a
surprising number of old trees, which, choked as they were with
undergrowth, looked as if they were still bearing fruit. The building,
which they had never even entered until yesterday, had served as a
sorting and packing house for the crop, though the old part of
it--paradoxically the upper part--appeared to have been built as a
dwelling by some pioneer settler. A second story had been added
underneath by digging out the bank.

It stood well back from the road, a grass grown lane with a turning
circle leading to it. It had what had once been a loading platform, wagon
high, instead of a veranda. The lower story, a single room which they
peered into through a crack in a warped unhinged door, seemed unpromising
enough, a dark cobwebby place, cumbered with wooden chutes from the floor
above by which, Graham explained, they rolled the apples down into
barrels after they had been sorted up-stairs. A carpenter had been busy
most of the morning, he added, flooring over the traps from which these
chutes led down.

Mary, though, fairly cried out with delight, and even Miss Wollaston
beamed appreciation when, Graham, having led them up the bank and around
to the back of the building, ushered them in, at the ground level up
here, to the upper story of the building. There was a fireplace in the
north end of it with twin brick erections on either side which they
thought must have been used for drying apples. The opposite end,
partitioned off, still housed a cider mill and press, but they had
contrived, he said, a makeshift bedroom out of it.

Along the east side of the room were three pairs of casement windows
which commanded a view of the greater part of the farm; across the road,
across Hickory Creek, across the long reach of the lower pasture and the
seemingly limitless stretches of new plowed fields. The clump of farm
buildings, old and new, was in the middle of the picture. Over to the
left not quite a mile away, behind what looked like nothing more than a
fold in the earth (the creek again, Graham explained. It swung an arc of
two hundred degrees or so, about the main body of their tillable land)
rose the heavily wooded slopes of Hickory Hill.

"We were surprised at this place," he said, "when we opened it up
yesterday. It's the best view on the farm. It will be a fine place
to build a real country house, some day, if we ever make money
enough to do that."

"It is a real country house already," Mary told him briskly. "You two,
living in a tent with a lovely old place like this just waiting for you!
Wait until Aunt Lucile and I have had a day at it and you'll see."

He looked as if he believed her. Indeed, he looked unutterable things,
contemplating her, there in that mellow old room,--wrinkling her nose a
little and declaring that she could still smell apples. But all he said
was that he supposed the roof leaked, but it couldn't be very bad because
everything seemed quite decently dry and not at all musty. He added that
he must be getting back to work, but that an odd-job man, capable more or
less of anything, was at her disposal for as long as she wanted him.

She went with him to the door when he made his rather precipitate
departure and stood, after she had waved him a temporary farewell, gazing
up at the soft sun-bathed slope with its aisles of gnarled trees. She
smiled at the sight of a decrepit long-handled wooden pump. She took a
long breath of the smell of the month of May. Then she turned, with Aunt
Lucile, to such practical matters as bedding, brooms and tea-kettles.

There was more to do than a first look had led them to suppose, and
their schemes grew ambitious, besides, as they advanced with them, so
that, for all the Briarean prodigies of Bill, the odd-job man, they went
to bed dog tired at nine o'clock that night with their labors not more
than half complete. They slept--Mary did, anyhow, the deepest sleep she
had known in years.

She waked at an unearthly--a heavenly hour. The thin ether-cool air was
quivering with the dissonance of bird calls; the low sun had laid great
slow-moving oblongs of reddish gilt upon the brown walls of the big room.
(She had left her aunt in undivided possession of the extemporized
bed-chamber.) She rose and opened the door and looked out into the
orchard. But what her eye came to rest upon was the old wooden pump.

It was a triumph of faith over skepticism, that pump. Graham had
contemned it utterly, hardly allowing, even, that it was picturesque, but
Bill, the odd-job man had, with her encouragement, spent a patient hour
over it and in the teeth of scientific probability, lo, it had given
forth streams of water as clear as any that had ever miraculously been
smitten out of a rock. The partners had forbidden her to drink any of it
except boiled, until it had been analyzed.

She looked about. She had the world to herself. So she carried her rubber
tub, her sponge and a bath-towel out to the warped wooden platform and
bathed _en plein air_, water and sun together. She came in, deliciously
shuddering, lighted a fire, already laid, of shavings and sticks, put the
kettle on to boil and dressed. She felt--new born that morning.

This sensation made the undercurrent of a long fully filled day. She
almost never had time to look at it but she knew it was there. It
enabled her to take with equanimity the unlooked-for arrival (so far as
she and her aunt were concerned) of Graham's young torn-boy sister,
Sylvia. It made it possible for her to say, "Why, yes, of course! I'd
love to," when Graham, along in the afternoon asked her if she wouldn't
go for a walk over the farm with him. They spent more than an hour at
it, sitting, a part of the time, side by side atop the gate into the
upper pasture, yet not even then had the comfortable sense of pleasant
companionship with him taken fright. It was a security that resided, she
knew, wholly in herself.

He was holding himself, obviously, on a very tight rein, and it was quite
conceivable that before her visit ended, he would bolt. There was a
moment, indeed--when he came with Rush to supper at the apple house and
got his first look at the transformation she had wrought in it--when that
possibility must have been in the minds of every one who saw his face.

She had dramatized the result of her two days' labor innocent of any
intention to produce an effect like that. The partners when they came
dropping in from time to time had, learned nothing of her plans, seen
none of their accomplishments, so to-night the old-fashioned settle
which Bill had knocked together from lumber in the packing room and she
had stained, two of the sorting tables, fitted into the corners beside
the fireplace to make a dais, the conversion of another into a capital
dining table by the simple expedient of lengthening its legs, the rag
rug, discovered in the village, during a flying trip with Sylvia this
morning in her car and ravished from the church fair it had been
intended for, the sacks of sheeting Aunt Lucile had been sewing
industriously all day, covered with burlaps and stuffed with hay to
serve as cushions, the cheese-cloth tacked up in gathers over the
windows and hemmed with pins,--all this, revealed at once, had the
surprise of a conjurer's trick, or, if one were predisposed that way,
the entrancement of a miracle.

She was a little entranced, herself, partly with fatigue for she had put
in, one after the other, two unusually laborious days, but partly no
doubt with her own magic, with this almost convincing simulation of a
home which she and her assistants had produced. It didn't matter that she
had gone slack and silent, because Sylvia, who just before supper had
shown a disposition to dreamy elegiac melancholy, rebounded, as soon as
she was filled with food, to the other end of the scale altogether and
swept Rush after her into a boisterous romp, which none of Aunt Lucile's
remonstrant asides to her nephew was effectual to quell.

She was an amazing creature, this product of the latest generation to
begin arriving at the fringes of maturity, a reedy young thing, as tall
as Graham, inches taller than Rush. She had the profile of a young Greek
goddess and the grin of a gamin. She was equally at home in a
ballgown--though she was not yet out--or in a pair of khaki riding
breeches and an olive drab shirt. She was capable of assuming a manner
that was a genuine gratification to her great aunt or one that startled
her father's stable men. She read French novels more or less at random,
(unknown to her mother. She had a rather mischievous uncle who was
responsible for this development) and she was still deadly accurate with
a snowball. A bewildering compound of sophistications and innocence, a
modern young sphinx with a riddle of her own.

Mary watched her tussling and tumbling about with Rush, pondering the
riddle but making no great effort to find an answer to it. Was she child
or woman? To herself what was she? And what did Rush think about her?
They were evidently well established on some sort of terms. Rush, no
doubt, would tell you--disgustedly if you sought explanation--that Sylvia
was just a kid. That he was fond of her as one would be of any nice kid
and that her rough young embraces, her challenges and her pursuits, meant
precisely what those of an uproarious young--well, nephew, say,--would
mean. Only his eagerness to go on playing the game cast a doubt upon that
explanation.

They went out abruptly after a while, just as it was getting dark, to
settle a bet as to which of them could walk the farthest along the top
rail of a certain old fence. Miss Wollaston saw them go with unconcealed
dismay, but it was hard to see how even a conscientious chaperon could
have prevented it so long as the child's elder brother would do nothing
to back her up. To Mary, half-way in her trance, it didn't seem much to
matter what the relation was or what came of it. It was a fine spring
night and they were a pair of beautifully untroubled young animals. Let
them play as they would.

Their departure, did, however, arouse Graham to the assumption of his
duties as host and he launched himself into a conversation with Miss
Wollaston; a fine example, Mary thought, of what really good breeding
means. Her aunt's questions about life in the navy were not the sort that
were easy to answer pleasantly and at large. They drew from him things he
must have been made to say a hundred times since his return and sometimes
they were so wide of the mark that it must have been hard not to stare or
laugh. He must have been wishing, too, with all his might down in the
disregarded depths of his heart, that the old lady would yield to the
boredom and fatigue that were slowly creeping over her. Soon! Before that
pair of Indians came back. But by nothing, not even the faintest
irrepressible inflection of voice was that wish made manifest.

It broke over Mary suddenly that this would never happen. Aunt Lucile
might die at her post, but she'd never, in Graham's presence, retire
through a door which was known to lead to her bedroom. She rose and going
around to her aunt's chair, laid a light hand on her shoulder. But she
spoke to Graham.

"Let's go out and bring in the wanderers," she said. "Aunt Lucile has had
a pretty long day and I know she won't be able to go to sleep until
Sylvia is tucked in for the night."

When the door had closed behind them and they stood where the path,
already faintly indicated, led down to the road, he stopped with a jerk
and mutely looked at her.

"Do you know where that fence of theirs is?" she asked.

"Yes, I guess so," he said. Then--it was almost a cry--"Must we go there?
Right away?"

"I don't know that we need." (Why should he be tortured like that! What
did it matter if the rigidity of some of her nightmare-born resolutions
got relaxed a little?) "Where do you want to go with me?"

He didn't answer for a minute, but when he did speak his voice was
steady enough. "There's a place up on the top of this hill where the
trees open out to the east, a lovely place. I went up there last night
after Rush had turned in. There'll be a moon along in a few minutes and
you can see it come up, from there. Could we wait for it?--I suppose Miss
Wollaston..."

"No, she'll be all right," Mary said. "Now that she thinks we're looking
for them."

As she moved up the slope she added, "I've a sort of interest in the
moon, myself, to-night."

"Perhaps if you'll take my hand--" he said stiffly. "It is dark here
under the trees."

Her single-minded intention had been to make him a little happier. She
liked him better to-night than ever, and that was saying a lot. But this
elaborate covering up of what he really wanted under the pretended need
of guiding her, tried her patience. The pretense was for himself, too, as
much as for her. He was holding her off at arm's length behind him as if
they were scaling an Alp!

In the spirit of mischief, half irritated, half amused, she crowded up to
his side and turned her hand so that their palms lay together. And she
said in a voice evenly matter-of-fact, "That's nicer, isn't it?"

He didn't succeed in producing anything audible in answer to that, but he
began presently, and rather at random, to talk. As if--she reflected,
mutinously,--some fact that must on no account be looked at would emerge,
un-escapable, the moment he stopped.

But the bewitching loveliness of the place he led her to made amends,
sponged away her irritation, brought back the Arcadian mood of the day. A
recently fallen apple tree just on the crest of the hill, offered in its
crotched arms a seat for both of them. With an ease which thrilled her he
lifted her in his hands to her place and vaulted up beside her. His arm
(excusably, again, for the hand was seeking a hold to steady him), crept
around behind her.

Once more he began to talk,--of nature, of the farm, of how it was the
real way to live, as we were meant to. One couldn't, of course, cut off
the city altogether. There were concerts and things. And the
companionship of old friends. Even at that it would be lonely. They had
felt it already. That was why it was such a marvelous thing to have her
here. She made a different world of it. Just as she had made what seemed
like a home out of that old apple house. No one could do that but a
woman, of course ...

She was no longer irritated by this. She barely listened, beyond noting
his circuitous but certain approach to the point of asking her, once
more, to marry him.

Her body seemed drugged with the loveliness of the night, with fatigue,
with him, with the immediacy of him,--but her mind was racing as it does
in dreams.

Nature was not, of course, the gentle sentimentalist Graham was talking
about, but one did get something out of close communion with her. A sense
of fundamentals. She was a--simplifier of ideas. Plain and
straightforward even in her enchantments. That moon they were waiting
for.... Already she was looking down upon a pair of lovers, somewhere,--a
thousand pairs!--with her bland unseeing face. And later to-night, long
after she had risen on them, upon a thousand more.

Of lovers? Well perhaps not. Not if one insisted upon the poets'
descriptions. But good enough for nature's simple purposes. Answering to
a desire, faint or imperious, that would lead them to put on her harness.
Take on her work.

Anthony March had never put on a harness. A rebel. And for the price of
his rebellion never had heard his music, except in his head. Clear
torment they could be, he had told her, those unheard melodies. Somehow
she could understand that. There was an unheard music in her. An
unfulfilled destiny, at all events, which was growing clamorous as the
echo of the boy's passion-if it were but an echo-pulsed in her throat,
drew her body down by insensible relaxations closer upon his.

The moon came up and they watched it, silent. The air grew heavy. The
call of a screech-owl made all the sound there was. She shivered and he
drew her, unresisting, tighter still. Then he bent down and kissed her.

He said, presently, in a strained voice, "You know what I have been
asking. Does that mean yes?"

She did not speak. The moon was up above the trees, yellow now. She
remembered a great broad voice, singing:

"Low hangs the moon. It rose late.
It is lagging-O I think it is heavy with love, with love"

With a passion that had broken away at last, the boy's hands took
possession of her. He kissed her mouth, hotly, and then again; drew back
gasping and stared into her small pale face with burning eyes. Her head
turned a little away from him.

"... Whichever way I turn, O I think you could give me
 My mate back again if you only would,
 For I am almost sure I see her dimly whichever way I look.
 O rising stars!..."

The languor was gone. She shivered and sat erect, he watching her in an
agony of apprehension. She looked slowly round at him.

"You haven't answered!" His voice broke over that into a sob. "Will you
marry me, Mary?"

"I don't know," she said dully, like one struggling out of a dream. "I
will if I can. I meant to for a while, I think. But ..."

He leaped to the ground and stood facing her with clenched hands. "I
ought to be shot," he said. "I'm not fit to touch you--a white thing like
you. I didn't mean to. Not like that. I meant ..."

She stared for an instant, totally at a loss for the meaning--the mere
direction of what he was trying to say. Then, slipping down from the
branch, she took him by the arms. "Don't!" she cried rather wildly.
"Don't talk like that! That's the last impossibility. Listen. I'm going
to tell you why."

But he was not listening for what it might be. He was still morosely
preoccupied with his own crime. He had been a beast! He had bruised, once
more, the white petals of a flower!

It was not that her courage failed. She saw he wouldn't believe. That he
couldn't be made to believe. It was no use. If he looked at her any
longer like that, she would laugh.

She buried her face in her arms and sobbed.

He rose to this crisis handsomely, waited without a word until she was
quiet and then suggested that they go and find Rush and Sylvia. And until
they were upon the point of joining the other pair nothing more was said
that had any bearing on what had happened in the apple tree. But in that
last moment he made a mute appeal for a chance to say another word.

He reminded her that she had said she would marry him if she could. This
was enough for him. More than he deserved. He was going back to the
beginning to try to build anew what his loss of self-control had wrecked.
She need say nothing now. If she'd wait, she'd see.


CHAPTER XIV

A CLAIRVOYANT INTERVAL


It was still May and the North Carolina mountain-side that John Wollaston
looked out upon was at the height of its annual debauch of azalea blooms,
a symphonic romance in the key of rose-color with modulations down to
strawberry and up to a clear singing white. For him though, the invalid,
cushioned and pillowed in an easy chair, a rug over his knees, these
splendors and the perfume of the soft bright air that bathed them had an
ironic significance.

He had arrived with Paula at this paradise early in the week, pretty well
exhausted with the ordinary fatigues of less than a day's journey in the
train. They were feeding him bouillon, egg-nogs and cream. On Paula's arm
he had managed this afternoon, his first walk, a matter of two or three
hundred yards about the hotel gardens, and at the end of it had been glad
to subside, half reclining into this easy chair, placed so that through
the open door and the veranda it gave upon, he could enjoy the view of
the color-drenched mountain-side.

He had dismissed Paula peremptorily for a real walk of her own. He had
told her, in simple truth, that he would enjoy being left to himself for
a while. She had taken this assurance for an altruistic mendacity, but
she had yielded at last to his insistence and gone, under an exacted
promise not to come back for at least an hour.

It offered some curious compensations though, this state of
helplessness--a limpidity of vision, clairvoyant almost. For a fortnight
he had been like a spectator sitting in the stalls of a darkened theatre
watching the performances upon a brilliantly lighted stage,
himself--himselves among the characters, for there was a past and a
future self for him to look at and ponder upon. The present self hardly
counted. All the old ambitions, desires, urgencies, which had been his
impulsive forces were gone--quiescent anyhow. He was as sexless, as cool,
as an image carved in jade.

And he was here in this lover's paradise--this was what drew the tribute
of a smile to the humor of the high gods--with Paula. And Paula was more
ardently in love with him than she had ever been before.

The quality of that smile must have carried over to the one he gave her
when she came back, well within her promised hour, from her walk. One
couldn't imagine anything lovelier or more inviting than the picture she
made framed in that doorway, coolly shaded against the bright blaze that
came in around her. She looked at him from there, for a moment,
thoughtfully.

"I don't believe you have missed me such a lot after all," she said.
"What have you been doing all the while?"

"Crystal-gazing," he told her.

She came over to him and took his hands, a caress patently enough through
the nurse's pretext that she was satisfying herself that he had not got
cold sitting there. She relinquished them suddenly, readjusted his rug
and pillows, then kissed him and told him she was going to the office to
see if there were any letters and went out again. She was gone but a
moment or two; returning, she dropped the little handful which were
addressed to him into his lap and carried one of her own to a chair near
the window.

He dealt idly with the congratulatory and well-wishing messages which
made up his mail. There was but one of them that drew even a gleam of
clearly focused intelligence from him. He gave most of his attention to
Paula. She was a wonderful person to watch,--the expressiveness of her,
that every nerve and muscle of her body seemed to have a part in. She
had opened that letter of hers with nothing but clear curiosity. The
envelope evidently had told her nothing. She had frowned, puzzled, over
the signature and then somehow, darkened, sprung to arms as she made it
out. She didn't read it in an orderly way even then; seemed to be trying
to worry the meaning out of it, like one stripping off husks to get down
to some sort of kernel inside. Satisfied that she had got it at last,
she dropped the letter carelessly on the floor, subsided a little deeper
into her chair and turned a brooding face toward the outdoor light and
away from him.

"Are you crystal-gazing, too?" he asked. Unusually, she didn't turn at
his voice and her own was monotonous with strongly repressed emotion.

"I don't need to. I spent more than a week staring into mine."

That lead was plain enough, but he avoided, deliberately though rather
idly, following it up. The rustle of paper told her that he had turned
back to his letters.

"Anything in your mail?" she asked.

"I think not. You can look them over and see if I've missed anything. To
a man in my disarticulate situation people don't write except to express
the kindness of their hearts. Here's a letter from Mary designed to
prevent me from worrying about her. Full of pleasant little anecdotes
about farm life. It's thoroughly Arcadian, she says. A spot designed by
Heaven for me to rusticate in this summer when--when we go back to town.
Somehow, I never did inhabit Arcady. There's a letter from Martin
Whitney, too, that's almost alarmingly encouraging in its insistence that
I mustn't worry. If only they knew how little I did--these days!"

"Well, that's all right then," she said. "Because those were Doctor
Darby's orders. You weren't to be excited or worried about anything. But,
John, is it really true that you don't? Not about anything?"

The fact that her face was still turned away as she asked that question
gave it a significance which could not be overlooked.

"It's perfectly true," he asserted. "I don't believe I could if I
tried. But there's something evidently troubling you. Let's have it.
Oh, don't be afraid. You've no idea what an--Olympian position one
finds himself in when he has got half-way across the Styx and come
back. Tell me about it."

"You know all about it already. I told you the first day you could
talk--that I was going to give up singing altogether except just for
you,--when you wanted me to. I knew I'd been torturing you about it. I
thought perhaps you'd get well quicker,--want to get well more--if you
knew that the torture wasn't to go on. It was true and it is true.
Perhaps you thought it was just one of those lies that people tell
invalids--one of those don't-worry things. Well, is wasn't.

"But you made me promise I wouldn't do anything--wouldn't break my
Ravinia contract--until we could talk it all out together. Your
temperature went up a little that afternoon and when Doctor Darby asked
me why, I told him. He said I mustn't, on any account, speak again to you
about it until you brought the subject up yourself. I don't know whether
he'd call this bringing it up or not, but anyway that's it. I've kept my
promise to you though," she concluded. "I haven't written. They still
think I am going to sing this summer."

"I am very glad of that," he said quietly. "I thought the thing was
settled by our first talk. I didn't realize that you had taken it merely
as an--adjournment."

She was still turned rigidly away from him, but the grip of one of her
hands upon the arm of a chair betrayed the excitement she was laboring
under, while it showed the effort she was making to hold it down.

"I didn't think, though," he went on, "that that resolution of yours to
give up your whole career,--make ducks and drakes of it, in obedience to
my whim--was nothing more than one of those pious lies that invalids are
fed upon. I knew you meant it, my dear. I knew you'd have done
it--then--without a falter or a regret."

"Then or now," she said. "It's all the same. No, it isn't! Now more than
then. With less regret. Without a shadow of a regret, John,--if it would
bring you back to me."

The last words were muffled, for she had buried her face in her hands.

He had heard the ring of undisguised passion in her voice without an
answering pulse-beat, sat looking at her thoughtfully, tenderly. The
reflection that occupied his mind was with what extravagant joy he would
have received such an assurance only a few weeks ago. On any one of those
last days before his illness fastened upon him;--the Sunday he had gone
to Hickory Hill alone because Paula had found she must work with March
that day; the evening when he had made his last struggle against the
approaching delirium of fever in order to telephone for an ambulance to
get him out of that hated house. What a curious compound of nerve ends
and gland activities a man's dreams--that he lived by, or died for--were!

She pulled him out of his reverie by a deliberate movement of resolution,
taking her hands away from her face, half rising and turning her chair so
that she faced him squarely.

"I want to know in so many words," she said, "why you're glad that I'm
still bound to that Ravinia thing. You seem to want me to sing there
this summer, as much as you hated the idea of my doing it before. Well,
why? Or is it something you can't tell me? And if I sing and make a
success, shall you want me to go on with it, following up whatever
opening it offers; just as if--just as if you didn't count any more in my
life at all?"

Before he could answer she added rather dryly, "Doctor Darby would kill
me for talking to you like this. You needn't answer if it's going to
hurt you."

"No," he said, "it isn't hurting me a bit. But I'll answer one question
at a time, I think. The first thing that occurred to me when you spoke of
the Ravinia matter was that I didn't want you to break your word. You had
told them that they could count on you and I didn't want you, on my
account, to be put in a position where any one could accuse you of having
failed him. My own word was involved, for that matter. I told LaChaise I
wouldn't put any obstacles, in your way. Of course, I didn't contract
lobar pneumonia on purpose," he added with a smile.

The intensity of her gaze did not relax at this, however. She was waiting
breathlessly.

"The other question isn't quite so easy to answer," he went on, "but I
think I would wish you to--follow the path of your career wherever it
leads. I shall always count for as much as I can in your life, but
not--if I can help it--as an obstacle."

"Why?" she asked. "What has made the perfectly enormous difference?"

It was not at all an unanswerable question; nor one, indeed, that he
shrank from. But it wanted a little preliminary reflection. She
interrupted before he was ready to speak.

"Of course, I really know. Have known all along. You haven't
forgiven me."

He echoed that word with a note of helplessness.

"No," she conceded. "That isn't it, exactly. I can't talk the way you and
Mary can. I suppose you have forgiven me, as far as that goes. That's the
worst of it. If you hadn't there'd be more to hope for. Or beg for. I'd
do that if it were any good. But this is something you can't help. You're
kind and sweet to me, but you've just stopped caring. For me. What used
to be there has just--gone snap. It's not your fault. I did it myself."

"No," he said quickly. "That's where you're altogether wrong. You didn't
do it. You had nothing to do with the doing of it."

She winced, visibly, at the implication that, whoever was responsible,
the thing was done.

"Paula, dearest!" he cried, in acute concern. "Wait! There are things
that can't be dealt with in a breath. That's why I was trying to think a
little before I answered."

Even now he had to marshal his thoughts for a moment before he could go
on. It was too ridiculous, that look of tragic desperation she wore while
she waited! He averted his eyes and began rather deliberately.

"You are dearer to me now--at this moment, as we sit here--than ever
you've been before. I think that's the simple literal truth. This matter
of forgiveness--of your having done something to forfeit or to destroy
my--love for you... Oh, it's too wildly off the facts to be dealt with
rationally! I owe you my life. That's not a sentimental exaggeration.
Even Steinmetz says so. And you saved it for me at the end of a period of
weeks--months I guess--when I had been devoting most of my spare energies
to torturing you. Myself, incidentally, but there was nothing meritorious
about that. In an attempt to assert a--proprietary right in you that you
had never even pretended to give me. That I'd once promised you I never
would assert. The weight of obligation I'm under to you would be
absolutely crushing--if it weren't for one thing that relieves me of it
altogether. The knowledge that you love me. That you did it all for the
love of me."

She moved no nearer him. These were words. There was no reassurance for
her in them. One irrepressible movement of his hands toward her, the mere
speaking of her name in a voice warmed by the old passion, would have
brought her, rapturous, to his knees.

"There's no such thing as a successful pretense between us, I know," he
said. "So I'll talk plainly. I'm glad to. I know what it is you miss in
me. It's gone. Temporarily I suppose, but gone as if it had never been.
That's a--physiological fact, Paula."

She flushed hotly at that and looked away from him.

"I don't know exactly what a soul is," he went on. "But I do know that a
body--the whole of the body--is the temple of it. It impenetrates
everything; is made up of everything. Well, this illness of mine has, for
these weeks, made an old man of me. And I'm grateful to it for giving me
a chance to look ahead, before it's too late. I want to make the most of
it. Because you see, my dear, in ten years--or thereabouts--the course of
nature will have made of me what this pneumonia has given me a foretaste
of. Ten years. You will be--forty, then."

She was gazing at him now, fascinated, in unwilling comprehension. "I
hate you to talk like that," she said. "I wish you wouldn't."

"It's important," he told her crisply. "You'll see that in a minute, if
you will wait. Before very long--in a month or so, perhaps--I shall be, I
suppose, pretty much the same man I was--three months ago. Busy at my
profession again. In love with you again. All my old self-assurance back;
the more arrogant if it isn't quite the real thing. So now's the time,
when the fogs one moves about in have lifted and the horizon is sharp, to
take some new bearings. And set a new course by them. For both of us.

"There is one fact sitting up like a lighthouse on a rock. I'm
twenty-four years older than you. Every five years that we live together
from now on will make that difference more important. When you're
forty-five--and you'll be just at the top of your powers by then--I shall
be one year short of seventy. At the end, you see, even of my
professional career. And that's only fifteen years away. Even with good
average luck, that's all I can count on. It's strange how one can live
along, oblivious to a simple sum in arithmetic like that."

She had been on her feet moving distractedly about the room. Now she came
around behind his chair and gripped his body in her strong arms.

"You shan't talk like that!" she said. "You shan't think like that! I
won't endure it. It's morbid. It's horrible."

"Oh, no, it's not," he said easily. "The morbidity is in being afraid
to look at it. It was morbid to struggle frantically, the way I did all
the spring, trying to resist the irresistible thing that was drawing
you along your true path. It was a cancerous egotism of mine that was
trying to eat you up, live you up into myself. That, thank God, has
been cut out of me! I think it has. Don't misunderstand me, though. I'm
not going to relinquish anything of you that I can keep;--that I ever
had a chance to keep."

He took her hands and gently--coolly--kissed them.

"Then don't relinquish anything," she said. "It's all yours. Can't you
believe that, John?"

He released her hands and sank back slackly in his chair. "Victory!" he
said, a note of inextinguishable irony in his voice. "A victory I'd have
given five years of my life for last March. Yet I could go on winning
them--a whole succession of them--and they could lead me to nothing but
disaster."

She left him abruptly and the next moment he heard her fling herself down
upon his bed. When he rose and disengaged himself from his rug, she said,
over an irrepressible sob or two, that he wasn't to mind nor come to her.
She wasn't going to cry-not more than a minute.

He came, nevertheless, settled himself on the edge of the bed and took
possession of her hands again.

"I wouldn't have told you all this," he said--"for you don't need any
lessons in arithmetic, child--if I dared trust myself to remember, after
the other thing had come back. Now I'm committed--don't you see?--not to
play the fool, tragically or ludicrously, as the case might be, trying to
dispute the inevitable. And I shall contrive to keep a lot, my dear. More
than you think."

Later, the evening of that same day, he asked her what was in the letter
that had provoked their talk. Did they want her back in Chicago for
rehearsals or consultations? Because if they did there was no reason in
the world why she should not go. At the rate at which he was gaining
strength there would not be the slightest reason--he gave her his
professional word of honor--why she should not go back in a day or two.

"I should have to go back," she said, "if I were going to sing March's
opera. There is such a lot of work about a new production that there
would be no time to spare."

"But," he asked, "isn't March's opera precisely what you are going to
sing?"

"No," she said rebelliously. "It's not. There wasn't anything in the
contract about that. I'll carry out the contract this summer. I'll keep
my word and yours, since that is what you want me to do. But I won't sing
'Dolores' for anybody."

He did not press her for the reason.

After a little silence, she said, "Lucile thought I'd fallen in love with
him. So did Rush, I guess,--and poor old Nat. Did you, John?"

"I tried to, hard enough," he confessed.

She stared. "Tried to!"

"That would have been the easier thing to fight," he said. "There's
nothing inevitable about a man,--any man. I'd have stood a chance at
least, of beating him, even though he had a twenty-year handicap or so.
But the other thing,--well, that was like the first bar of the Fifth
Symphony, you know; Fate knocking at the door. Clear terror that is until
one can get the courage to open the door and invite Fate in."


CHAPTER XV

THE END OF IT


About a week later--just at the beginning of June, this was--Paula did go
back to Chicago, leaving her husband to go on gaining the benefit, for
another ten days or so, of that wine-like mountain air. It was an
unwelcome conviction that he really wanted her to go, rather than any
crying need for her at Ravinia that decided her to leave him. The need
would not be urgent for at least another fortnight since it had been
decided between her and LaChaise that she should make her debut in
_Tosca_, an opera she had sung uncounted times.

Since their momentous conversation in which John had attempted to revise
the fundamentals of their life together, they had not reverted to the
main theme of it; had clarified, merely, one or two of its more immediate
conclusions. Paula was to carry out in spirit as well as in letter the
terms of her Ravinia contract exactly as if it were still to be regarded
as the first step of her reopened career. What she should do about the
second step in case it offered itself to her was a bridge not to be
crossed until they came to it.

John had professed himself content to let it remain at that, but she
divined that there was something hollow in his profession. It was
possible, of course, that his restlessness represented nothing more than
a new stage in his convalescence. It didn't seem possible that after the
candors of that talk he could still be keeping something back from her.
Yet that was an impression she very clearly got. Anyhow, her presence was
doing him no good, and on that unwelcome assurance, she bade him a
forlorn farewell and went home.

It was a true intuition. John heaved a sigh of relief when she was
gone. In his present enfeebled state she was too much for him. The
electrical vitality of her overpowered him. Even before his illness he
had had moments--I think I have recorded one of them--when her ardent
strength paralyzed him with a sort of terror and these moments were more
frequent now.

There was, too, a real effort involved in presenting ideas to her
(intellectual ideas, if they may be so distinguished from emotional
ones). He didn't know, now, whether she had fully understood what he had
been driving at that day; whether anything had really got through to her
beyond a melancholy realization that his love had cooled. He had always
been aware of this effort, but in the days of his strength he hadn't
minded making it.

Now he was conscious of wishing for some one like Mary,--indeed, for Mary
herself. They talked the same language, absolutely. Their minds had the
same index of refraction, so that thoughts flashed back and forth between
them effortlessly and without distortion. He thought of her so often and
wished for her so much during the first two days of his solitude that it
seemed almost a case for the psychical research people when he got a
telegram from her.

It read: "Aunt Lucile worried you left alone especially traveling. Shall
you mind or will Paula if I come down and bring you back, Mary."

There was a situation made clear, at all events. He grinned over it as
he despatched his wire to her. "Perfectly unnecessary but come
straight along so that we can play together for a week or two before
starting home."

Play together is just what they did. Enough of his strength soon came
back to make real walks possible and during the second week, with a
two-horse team and a side-bar buggy, they managed, without any ill
effect upon him, an excursion across the valley and up the opposite
mountainside to a log cabin road-house where they had lunch.

Mary, a born horsewoman, did the driving herself, thus relieving them of
the impediment to real companionship which a hired driver would have
been. In an inconsecutive, light-hearted way difficult to report
intelligibly, they managed to tell each other a lot. She let him see,
with none of the rhetorical solemnities which a direct statement would
have involved, her new awareness of his professional eminence. A dozen
innuendoes, as light as dandelion feathers, conveyed it to him; swift
brush-strokes of gesture and inflection sketched the picture in; an
affectionate burlesque of awe completed it, so that he could laugh at her
for it as she had meant he should.

She told him during their drive what the source of her illumination was;
described Anthony March's visit on that most desperate day of all, the
vividness of his concern over the outcome of the fight and his utter
unconcern about the effect of it upon his own fortunes. She had been
reading Kipling aloud, out at the farm, to the boys and Aunt Lucile and a
memory of it led her to make a comparison--heedless of its
absurdity--between the composer and Kirn's lama. "He isn't, anyhow, tied
to the 'wheel of things' any more than that old man was."

"I'd like to have come down that day and heard him talk," John said.
"Because it's the real thing, with him. Not words. He wouldn't be a bad
person to go to," he added musingly, "if one had got himself into a
real _impasse_--or what looked like one. Paula has chucked his opera,
you know."

She nodded, evidently not in the least surprised and, no more, perturbed
by this intelligence. "He won't mind that," she explained. "The only
thing he really needs, in the world, is to hear his music, but this, you
see, wasn't his any more. He had been trying to make it Paula's. He had
been working over it rather hopelessly, because he had promised, but it
was like letting him out of school when he found that she had forgotten
all about him;--didn't care if she never saw him again."

She caught, without an explanatory word, the meaning of the glance her
father turned upon her, and went straight on. "Oh, it seems a lot, I
know, to have found out about him in one short talk, but there's
nothing--personal in that. He doesn't, I mean--save himself up for
special people. He's there for anybody. Like a public drinking fountain,
you know. That's why he would be such a wonderful person--to go to, as
you said. No one could possibly monopolize him."

She added, after a silence, "It seems a shame, when he wants so little
that he can't have that. Can't hear, for example, that opera of his the
way he really wrote it."

"We owe him something," her father said thoughtfully. "He got rather
rough justice from Paula, anyhow. I suppose a thing like that could,
perhaps, be managed--if one put his back into it."

She understood instantly, as before, and quite without exegesis, the
twinge of pain that went across his face. "You _will_ have a back to
put into things again, one of these days. It wants only courage to wait
for it, quite patiently until it comes. You've plenty of that. That's
one of he things Mr. March told me about you," she added with the
playful purpose of surprising him again. "Only I happened to know that
for myself."

"It's more than I can be sure of," he said. "I've been full of bravado
with Paula, telling her how soon I was going to be back in harness again;
cock-sure and domineering as ever, so that she'd better make hay while
the sun shone. But it was I, nevertheless, who made her go home so that
she could start to work--when the whistle blew. Some one was going to
have to support the family, I told her, and it didn't look as if it were
going to be me."

This speech, though it ended in jest, had begun, she knew, in earnest. He
meant her to understand that, and left her to judge for herself where the
dividing line fell. She answered in a tone as light as his, "Paula could
do it easily enough." But she was not satisfied with the way he took it.
The mere quality of the silence must have told her something. She turned
upon him with sudden intensity and said, "Don't tell me you're
worrying--about three great healthy people like us. You have been,
though. Whatever put it into your mind to spend half a thought on that?"

"Why, it was a letter from Martin Whitney," he said. "Oh, the best meant
thing in the world. Nothing but encouragement in it from beginning to
end, only it was so infernally encouraging, it set me off. No, let me
talk. You're quite the easiest person in the world to tell things to.
I've been remiss, there's no getting away from that. I've never taken
money-making very seriously, it came so easily. I've spent my earnings
the way my friends have spent their incomes. Well, if I'd died the other
day, there wouldn't have been much left. There would have been my life
insurance for Paula, and enough to pay my debts, including my engagements
for Rush, but beyond that, oh, a pittance merely. Of course with ten
years' health, back at my practise, even with five, I could improve the
situation a lot."

She urged as emphatically as she dared--she wanted to avoid the
mistake of sounding encouraging--that the situation needed no
improvement. The income of fifty thousand dollars would take care of
Paula, and beyond that,--well, if there were ever two healthy young
animals in the world concerning whom cares and worries were
superfluous, they were herself and Rush.

He told her thoughtfully that this was where she was; wrong. "Rush, to
begin with, isn't a healthy young animal. That's what I couldn't make
Martin Whitney understand. He's one of the war's sacrifices precisely as
much as if he had had his leg shot off. He needs support; will go on
needing it for two or three years, financial as well as moral. He mustn't
be allowed to fail. That's the essence of it. He's--spent, you see;
depleted. One speaks of it in figurative terms, but it's a physiological
thing--if we could get at it--that's behind the lassitude of these boys.
It all comes back to that. That they're restless, irresolute. That they
need the stimulus of excitement and can't endure the drag of routine.
They need a generous allowance, my dear,--even for an occasional failure
in self-command, those two boys out at Hickory Hill."

She had nothing to say to that, though his pause gave her opportunity. A
sudden surmise as to the drift of that last sentence, silenced her. And
it was a surmise that leaped, in the next instant, to full conviction. He
was pleading Graham's cause with her! Why? Was it something that had been
as near his heart as that, all along? Or had some one--Rush--or even
Graham himself--engaged his advocacy?

She said at last, rather breathlessly (it was necessary to say something
or he would perceive that his stratagem had betrayed itself): "Well, at
the gloomy worst, Rush is taken care of. And as for me, I'm not a war
sacrifice, anyhow. That's not a possible conception--even for a worried
convalescent. Did you ever _see_ anything as gorgeous as that tree, even
in an Urban stage setting?"

"No," he said, "the war wasn't what you were sacrificed to."

She held her breath until she saw he wasn't going on with that. But he
seemed willing to follow her lead to lighter matters, and for the rest
of their excursion they carried out the pretense that there was nothing
like a cloud in their sky.

That evening, though, after she had bidden him good night, she changed
her mind and came back into his room. There had been something wistful
about his kiss that, determined her.

"Which of them wrote to you about me?" she asked.

"Both," he told her. "Of course I should have known you'd guess. Forgive
me for having tried to--manage you. I'll show you both their letters if
you like. It's a breach of confidence, of course, but I don't know that I
could do better."

"I'll read Rush's," she said. "Not the other."

She carried it over to the lamp, and for a while after she had taken in
its easily grasped intent she went on turning its pages back and forth
while she sought for an end of the tangled skein of her thoughts to
hold on by.

Finally, "Do you want me to marry him, dad?" she asked. Then, before he
could answer she hurried on. "I mean, would it relieve you from some
nightmare worry about me if I did?--This has to be plain talk, doesn't
it, if it is to get us anywhere?"

"That's a fair question of yours," he said. But he wasn't ready at once
with an answer. "It _would_ be such a relief, provided you really wanted
to marry him. That goes to the bottom of it, I think. My responsibility
is to make it possible for you to--follow your heart. To marry or not as
you wish. To marry a poor man if you wish. But if Graham is your choice
and all that holds you back from him is some remediable
misunderstanding--or failure to understand ..."

"I don't know whether it's remediable or not," she said; and added, "I
told him I would marry him if I could. Did he tell you that?"

It was a mistake to have quoted that expression to her father. He took
it just as Graham had. Of course! What else could he think? She sat with
clenched hands and a dry throat, listening while he tried to enlighten
what he took to be her innocent misunderstanding.

They had never spoken, she realized, about matters of sex. For anything
he really knew to the contrary she might have been as ignorant as a
child. He was actually talking as one talks to a child;--kindly,
tolerantly, tenderly, but with an unconscious touch of patronage, like
one trying to explain away--misgivings about Santa Claus! There were
elements, inevitably, in a man's love for a woman, that a young girl
could not understand. Nothing but experience could bring that
understanding home to her. This was what in one way after another, he was
trying to convey.

But the intuition which, in good times or bad, always betrayed their
emotions to each other, showed him that he was, somehow missing the mark.
Her silence through his tentative little pauses disconcerted him heavily.
He ran down at last like an unwound clock.

It was only after a long intolerably oppressive silence that she found
her voice. "The misunderstanding isn't what you think," she said. "Nor
what Graham thinks. It's his misunderstanding, not mine. He thinks that I
am--a sort of innocent angel that he's not good enough for. And the fact
is that I'm not--not innocent enough for him. Not an angel at all. Not
even quite--good."

But she got no further. The plea for comprehension, for an ear that would
not turn away from her plain story, never was made. In a smother of words
he halted her. Affectionately, with a gentleness that achieved absolute
finality. She was overwrought. She carried paradox too far. In her
innocence she used a form of speech that she didn't know the meaning of,
and should be careful to avoid. Her troubles, with patience, would work
themselves out in the end. Meanwhile let her as far as possible stop
thinking about them.

But she had got, during the intaken breath before he began to speak, a
sensation,--as sharp and momentary as the landscape revealed in a
lightning flash,--of a sudden terror on his part; as of one finding
himself on the edge of an abyss of understanding. For that one glaring
instant before he had had time to turn his face away he had known what
she meant. But he never would look again. Never would know.


CHAPTER XVI

FULL MEASURE


Ravinia is one of Chicago's idiosyncrasies, a ten-weeks' summer season of
grand opera with a full symphony orchestra given practically
out-of-doors. Its open pavilion seats from fifteen hundred to two
thousand people and on a warm Saturday night, you will find twice as many
more on the, "bleachers" that surround it or strolling about under the
trees in the park. The railroad runs special trains to it all through the
season from town, and crammed and groaning interurbans collect their toll
for miles from up and down the shore.

It had begun as an amusement park with merry-go-rounds, Ferris-wheels and
such--to the scandalized indignation of numerous super-urban persons
whose summer places occupied most of the district roundabout. They took
the enterprise into their own hands, abolished the calliope, put a
symphony orchestra into the bandstand and, eventually, transformed the
shell into a stage and went in for opera; opera popularized with a blue
pencil so that no performance was ever more than two hours long, and at
the modest price of fifty cents.

Its forces, recruited chiefly from among the younger stars at the
Metropolitan, give performances that want no apologetic allowance from
anybody. It has become an institution of which the town and especially
the North Shore is boastful.

Paula foresaw no easy conquest here. Her social prestige, part of which
she enjoyed as John Wollaston's wife and part of which she had earned
during the last four years for herself, counted as much against her as it
did in her favor. It was evident from the way the announcements of her
prospective appearance at Ravinia had been elaborated in the society
columns of the newspapers that it would arouse a lot of curiosity. It
would be one of the topics that everybody, in the social-register sense
of the word, would be talking about and in order to talk authoritatively
everybody--four or five hundred people this is to say--would have to
attend at least one of her performances.

Nothing less than a downright unmistakable triumph would convince them.
She was a professional in the grain and yet in this adventure she would
be under the curse of an amateur's status, a thing she hated as all
professionals do.

It was evidently from an instinct to cut herself off as completely as
possible from these social connections of hers that she rented for the
summer, a furnished house in the village of Ravinia, within a mile or so
of the park. John was rather disconcerted over this when she told him
about it. She greeted him with it as an accomplished fact upon his
return to Chicago with Mary. She made a genuine effort to explain the
necessity, but explanations were not in Paula's line and she didn't
altogether succeed.

She made it clear enough, though, that she didn't want to be fussed by
the attentions of friends or family, of her husband least of all. She
didn't want to be congratulated nor encouraged. She didn't want to be
asked to little suppers or luncheons nor to be made the objective of
personally conducted tourist parties back stage. She didn't want to be
called to the telephone, ever, except on matters of professional business
by her Ravinia colleagues.

All of this, John pointed out, could be accomplished at home. He,
himself, could deal with the telephoners and the tourists. This was about
all apparently that he was going to be good for this summer; but a
watchdog's duties he could perform in a highly efficient manner.

"But a home and a husband are the very first things I've got to forget
about," cried Paula. "Oh, can't you see!"

Darkly and imperfectly, he did. The atmosphere of the home in which one
has been guarded and pampered as a priceless possession was--must
be--enervating, and to one who was screwing up her powers to their
highest pitch for a great effort like this, it would be
poisonous--malarial! He would have been clearer about it, though, but for
the misgiving that, consciously or not, Paula was punishing him for
having insisted that she carry her contract through. Or--if that were too
harsh a way of putting it,--that she was coquetting with him. Having told
her down there in the South that he didn't care for her in a loverlike
way, he might now have an opportunity of proving that he did--over
obstacles!

It gave him a twinge, for a fact, but he managed to ask good-humoredly if
this meant that he was to be barred from the whole show, from
performances as well as from rehearsals and the Ravinia house.

"I won't care," she said with a laugh of desperation, "after I've once
got my teeth in. But until then... Oh, I know it sounds horrible but I
don't want even to--feel you; not even in the fringe of it.

"I'll tell you who I would like, though," she went on over a palpable
hesitation and with a flush of color rising to her cheeks. "I can't live
all alone up there of course. I could get along with just a maid, but it
would be easier and nicer if I could have some one for a--companion. And
the person I'd choose, if she'd do it, is Mary."

He said, not quite knowing whether to be pleased or not, that they could
ask her about it at all events. They were rather counting on her out at
Hickory Hill but he didn't know that that need matter. Only wasn't
Mary--family, herself, a reminder of home?

"Not a bit," said Paula, with a laugh. "Not but what she likes me well
enough," she went on, trying to account for her preference (these
Wollastons were always concerned about the whys of things) "but she
stands off a little and looks on; without holding her breath, either. And
then, well, she'd be a sort of reminder of you, after all."

Put that way, he couldn't quarrel with it, though there was a
challenge about it that chilled him a little. Watched over by his own
daughter (this was what it came to) Paula would be beyond
suspicion--even of Lucile.

Mary, when the scheme was put up to her was no less surprised than
John had been, but she was pleased clear through, and with a
clean-cutting executive skill he had hardly credited her with, she
thought out the details of the plan and revised the rest of their
summer arrangements to fit.

The Dearborn Avenue house should be closed and her father should move out
to the farm. The apple house was now remodeled to a point where it would
accommodate him as well as Aunt Lucile very comfortably. The boys and the
servants could live around in tents and things. She'd want only one maid
for the cottage at Ravina and the small car which she'd drive herself.

The sum of all the activities that Mary proposed for herself added up to
a really exacting job; housekeeper, personal maid, chauffeur, chaperon
and secretary. It was with a rather mixed lot of emotions that John
thought of delivering her over to be tied to Paula's chariot wheels like
that. One of the two women who loved him serving the other in a capacity
so nearly menial! The thought of it gave him an odd sort of thrill even
while he shrank from it. Certainly, he would not have assented to it, had
it not been so unmistakably what Mary herself wanted. Her reasons for
wanting it he couldn't feel that he had quite fathomed.

