The news of this defiance spread from prisoner to prisoner with the
speed of wings; every face was seen to be illuminated like those of
the spectators at a horse-race; and indeed you must first have
tasted the active life of a soldier, and then mouldered for a while
in the tedium of a jail, in order to understand, perhaps even to
excuse, the delight of our companions.  Goguelat and I slept in the
same squad, which greatly simplified the business; and a committee
of honour was accordingly formed of our shed-mates.  They chose for
president a sergeant-major in the 4th Dragoons, a greybeard of the
army, an excellent military subject, and a good man.  He took the
most serious view of his functions, visited us both, and reported
our replies to the committee.  Mine was of a decent firmness.  I
told him the young lady of whom Goguelat had spoken had on several
occasions given me alms.  I reminded him that, if we were now
reduced to hold out our hands and sell pill-boxes for charity, it
was something very new for soldiers of the Empire.  We had all seen
bandits standing at a corner of a wood truckling for copper
halfpence, and after their benefactors were gone spitting out
injuries and curses.  'But,' said I, 'I trust that none of us will
fall so low.  As a Frenchman and a soldier, I owe that young child
gratitude, and am bound to protect her character, and to support
that of the army.  You are my elder and my superior:  tell me if I
am not right.'

He was a quiet-mannered old fellow, and patted me with three
fingers on the back.  'C'est bien, mon enfant,' says he, and
returned to his committee.

Goguelat was no more accommodating than myself.  'I do not like
apologies nor those that make them,' was his only answer.  And
there remained nothing but to arrange the details of the meeting.
So far as regards place and time we had no choice; we must settle
the dispute at night, in the dark, after a round had passed by, and
in the open middle of the shed under which we slept.  The question
of arms was more obscure.  We had a good many tools, indeed, which
we employed in the manufacture of our toys; but they were none of
them suited for a single combat between civilised men, and, being
nondescript, it was found extremely hard to equalise the chances of
the combatants.  At length a pair of scissors was unscrewed; and a
couple of tough wands being found in a corner of the courtyard, one
blade of the scissors was lashed solidly to each with resined
twine--the twine coming I know not whence, but the resin from the
green pillars of the shed, which still sweated from the axe.  It
was a strange thing to feel in one's hand this weapon, which was no
heavier than a riding-rod, and which it was difficult to suppose
would prove more dangerous.  A general oath was administered and
taken, that no one should interfere in the duel nor (suppose it to
result seriously) betray the name of the survivor.  And with that,
all being then ready, we composed ourselves to await the moment.

The evening fell cloudy; not a star was to be seen when the first
round of the night passed through our shed and wound off along the
ramparts; and as we took our places, we could still hear, over the
murmurs of the surrounding city, the sentries challenging its
further passage.  Leclos, the sergeant-major, set us in our
stations, engaged our wands, and left us.  To avoid blood-stained
clothing, my adversary and I had stripped to the shoes; and the
chill of the night enveloped our bodies like a wet sheet.  The man
was better at fencing than myself; he was vastly taller than I,
being of a stature almost gigantic, and proportionately strong.  In
the inky blackness of the shed, it was impossible to see his eyes;
and from the suppleness of the wands, I did not like to trust to a
parade.  I made up my mind accordingly to profit, if I might, by my
defect; and as soon as the signal should be given, to throw myself
down and lunge at the same moment.  It was to play my life upon one
card:  should I not mortally wound him, no defence would be left
me; what was yet more appalling, I thus ran the risk of bringing my
own face against his scissor with the double force of our assaults,
and my face and eyes are not that part of me that I would the most
readily expose.

'Allez!' said the sergeant-major.

Both lunged in the same moment with an equal fury, and but for my
manoeuvre both had certainly been spitted.  As it was, he did no
more than strike my shoulder, while my scissor plunged below the
girdle into a mortal part; and that great bulk of a man, falling
from his whole height, knocked me immediately senseless.

When I came to myself I was laid in my own sleeping-place, and
could make out in the darkness the outline of perhaps a dozen heads
crowded around me.  I sat up.  'What is it?' I exclaimed.

'Hush!' said the sergeant-major.  'Blessed be God, all is well.'  I
felt him clasp my hand, and there were tears in his voice.  ''Tis
but a scratch, my child; here is papa, who is taking good care of
you.  Your shoulder is bound up; we have dressed you in your
clothes again, and it will all be well.'

At this I began to remember.  'And Goguelat?' I gasped.

'He cannot bear to be moved; he has his bellyful; 'tis a bad
business,' said the sergeant-major.

The idea of having killed a man with such an instrument as half a
pair of scissors seemed to turn my stomach.  I am sure I might have
killed a dozen with a firelock, a sabre, a bayonet, or any accepted
weapon, and been visited by no such sickness of remorse.  And to
this feeling every unusual circumstance of our rencounter, the
darkness in which we had fought, our nakedness, even the resin on
the twine, appeared to contribute.  I ran to my fallen adversary,
kneeled by him, and could only sob his name.

He bade me compose myself.  'You have given me the key of the
fields, comrade,' said he.  'Sans rancune!'

At this my horror redoubled.  Here had we two expatriated Frenchmen
engaged in an ill-regulated combat like the battles of beasts.
Here was he, who had been all his life so great a ruffian, dying in
a foreign land of this ignoble injury, and meeting death with
something of the spirit of a Bayard.  I insisted that the guards
should be summoned and a doctor brought.  'It may still be possible
to save him,' I cried.

The sergeant-major reminded me of our engagement.  'If you had been
wounded,' said he, 'you must have lain there till the patrol came
by and found you.  It happens to be Goguelat--and so must he!
Come, child, time to go to by-by.'  And as I still resisted,
'Champdivers!' he said, 'this is weakness.  You pain me.'

'Ay, off to your beds with you!' said Goguelat, and named us in a
company with one of his jovial gross epithets.

Accordingly the squad lay down in the dark and simulated, what they
certainly were far from experiencing, sleep.  It was not yet late.
The city, from far below, and all around us, sent up a sound of
wheels and feet and lively voices.  Yet awhile, and the curtain of
the cloud was rent across, and in the space of sky between the
eaves of the shed and the irregular outline of the ramparts a
multitude of stars appeared.  Meantime, in the midst of us lay
Goguelat, and could not always withhold himself from groaning.

We heard the round far off; heard it draw slowly nearer.  Last of
all, it turned the corner and moved into our field of vision:  two
file of men and a corporal with a lantern, which he swung to and
fro, so as to cast its light in the recesses of the yards and
sheds.

'Hullo!' cried the corporal, pausing as he came by Goguelat.

But the people below, and especially the Mamsell, he wanted to sound
even say his opinion on such a treatment - he had been to the Rock
above zugeknöpft up, quite determined and determinirt really, really,
and went a few times in his small room with quick steps up and down
the Zornesworte to repeat it against them auszuschleudern imagined.

Was that a treatment for a decent man whom Commerzienrath from the
Games to leave?

As Goguelat was raised and laid upon a stretcher, he cried to us a
cheerful and blasphemous farewell.


CHAPTER III--MAJOR CHEVENIX COMES INTO THE STORY, AND GOGUELAT GOES
OUT


There was never any talk of a recovery, and no time was lost in
getting the man's deposition.  He gave but the one account of it:
that he had committed suicide because he was sick of seeing so many
Englishmen.  The doctor vowed it was impossible, the nature and
direction of the wound forbidding it.  Goguelat replied that he was
more ingenious than the other thought for, and had propped up the
weapon in the ground and fallen on the point--'just like
Nebuchadnezzar,' he added, winking to the assistants.  The doctor,
who was a little, spruce, ruddy man of an impatient temper, pished
and pshawed and swore over his patient.  'Nothing to be made of
him!' he cried.  'A perfect heathen.  If we could only find the
weapon!'  But the weapon had ceased to exist.  A little resined
twine was perhaps blowing about in the castle gutters; some bits of
broken stick may have trailed in corners; and behold, in the
pleasant air of the morning, a dandy prisoner trimming his nails
with a pair of scissors!

Finding the wounded man so firm, you may be sure the authorities
did not leave the rest of us in peace.  No stone was left unturned.
We were had in again and again to be examined, now singly, now in
twos and threes.  We were threatened with all sorts of impossible
severities and tempted with all manner of improbable rewards.  I
suppose I was five times interrogated, and came off from each with
flying colours.  I am like old Souvaroff, I cannot understand a
soldier being taken aback by any question; he should answer, as he
marches on the fire, with an instant briskness and gaiety.  I may
have been short of bread, gold or grace; I was never yet found
wanting in an answer.  My comrades, if they were not all so ready,
were none of them less staunch; and I may say here at once that the
inquiry came to nothing at the time, and the death of Goguelat
remained a mystery of the prison.  Such were the veterans of
France!  And yet I should be disingenuous if I did not own this was
a case apart; in ordinary circumstances, some one might have
stumbled or been intimidated into an admission; and what bound us
together with a closeness beyond that of mere comrades was a secret
to which we were all committed and a design in which all were
equally engaged.  No need to inquire as to its nature:  there is
only one desire, and only one kind of design, that blooms in
prisons.  And the fact that our tunnel was near done supported and
inspired us.

I came off in public, as I have said, with flying colours; the
sittings of the court of inquiry died away like a tune that no one
listens to; and yet I was unmasked--I, whom my very adversary
defended, as good as confessed, as good as told the nature of the
quarrel, and by so doing prepared for myself in the future a most
anxious, disagreeable adventure.  It was the third morning after
the duel, and Goguelat was still in life, when the time came round
for me to give Major Chevenix a lesson.  I was fond of this
occupation; not that he paid me much--no more, indeed, than
eighteenpence a month, the customary figure, being a miser in the
grain; but because I liked his breakfasts and (to some extent)
himself.  At least, he was a man of education; and of the others
with whom I had any opportunity of speech, those that would not
have held a book upsidedown would have torn the pages out for pipe-
lights.  For I must repeat again that our body of prisoners was
exceptional:  there was in Edinburgh Castle none of that
educational busyness that distinguished some of the other prisons,
so that men entered them unable to read, and left them fit for high
employments.  Chevenix was handsome, and surprisingly young to be a
major:  six feet in his stockings, well set up, with regular
features and very clear grey eyes.  It was impossible to pick a
fault in him, and yet the sum-total was displeasing.  Perhaps he
was too clean; he seemed to bear about with him the smell of soap.
Cleanliness is good, but I cannot bear a man's nails to seem
japanned.  And certainly he was too self-possessed and cold.  There
was none of the fire of youth, none of the swiftness of the
soldier, in this young officer.  His kindness was cold, and cruel
cold; his deliberation exasperating.  And perhaps it was from this
character, which is very much the opposite of my own, that even in
these days, when he was of service to me, I approached him with
suspicion and reserve.

I looked over his exercise in the usual form, and marked six
faults.

'H'm.  Six,' says he, looking at the paper.  'Very annoying!  I can
never get it right.'

'Oh, but you make excellent progress!' I said.  I would not
discourage him, you understand, but he was congenitally unable to
learn French.  Some fire, I think, is needful, and he had quenched
his fire in soapsuds.

He put the exercise down, leaned his chin upon his hand, and looked
at me with clear, severe eyes.

'I think we must have a little talk,' said he.

'I am entirely at your disposition,' I replied; but I quaked, for I
knew what subject to expect.

'You have been some time giving me these lessons,' he went on, 'and
I am tempted to think rather well of you.  I believe you are a
gentleman.'

'I have that honour, sir,' said I.

- Yes and no, as you want. "" And that would be? "" You must heirathen.
"" Heirathen? "Cried the Commerzienrath, with a sentence from his
armchair and jumping out shy look after tossing Thür.

If the Dorothee word would have been heard!

'What about this Goguelat?'

'You heard me yesterday before the court,' I began.  'I was
awakened only--'

'Oh yes; I "heard you yesterday before the court," no doubt,' he
interrupted, 'and I remember perfectly that you were "awakened
only."  I could repeat the most of it by rote, indeed.  But do you
suppose that I believed you for a moment?'

'Neither would you believe me if I were to repeat it here,' said I.

'I may be wrong--we shall soon see,' says he; 'but my impression is
that you will not "repeat it here."  My impression is that you have
come into this room, and that you will tell me something before you
go out.'

I shrugged my shoulders.

'Let me explain,' he continued.  'Your evidence, of course, is
nonsense.  I put it by, and the court put it by.'

'My compliments and thanks!' said I.

'You MUST know--that's the short and the long,' he proceeded.  'All
of you in shed B are bound to know.  And I want to ask you where is
the common-sense of keeping up this farce, and maintaining this
cock-and-bull story between friends.  Come, come, my good fellow,
own yourself beaten, and laugh at it yourself.'

'Well, I hear you, go ahead,' said I.  'You put your heart in it.'

He crossed his legs slowly.  'I can very well understand,' he
began, 'that precautions have had to be taken.  I dare say an oath
was administered.  I can comprehend that perfectly.'  (He was
watching me all the time with his cold, bright eyes.)  'And I can
comprehend that, about an affair of honour, you would be very
particular to keep it.'

'About an affair of honour?' I repeated, like a man quite puzzled.

'It was not an affair of honour, then?' he asked.

'What was not?  I do not follow,' said I.

He gave no sign of impatience; simply sat awhile silent, and began
again in the same placid and good-natured voice:  'The court and I
were at one in setting aside your evidence.  It could not deceive a
child.  But there was a difference between myself and the other
officers, because _I_ KNEW MY MAN and they did not.  They saw in
you a common soldier, and I knew you for a gentleman.  To them your
evidence was a leash of lies, which they yawned to hear you
telling.  Now, I was asking myself, how far will a gentleman go?
Not surely so far as to help hush a murder up?  So that--when I
heard you tell how you knew nothing of the matter, and were only
awakened by the corporal, and all the rest of it--I translated your
statements into something else.  Now, Champdivers,' he cried,
springing up lively and coming towards me with animation, 'I am
going to tell you what that was, and you are going to help me to
see justice done:  how, I don't know, for of course you are under
oath--but somehow.  Mark what I'm going to say.'

At that moment he laid a heavy, hard grip upon my shoulder; and
whether he said anything more or came to a full stop at once, I am
sure I could not tell you to this day.  For, as the devil would
have it, the shoulder he laid hold of was the one Goguelat had
pinked.  The wound was but a scratch; it was healing with the first
intention; but in the clutch of Major Chevenix it gave me agony.
My head swam; the sweat poured off my face; I must have grown
deadly pale.

He removed his hand as suddenly as he had laid it there.  'What is
wrong with you?' said he.

'It is nothing,' said I.  'A qualm.  It has gone by.'

'Are you sure?' said he.  'You are as white as a sheet.'

'Oh no, I assure you!  Nothing whatever.  I am my own man again,' I
said, though I could scarce command my tongue.

'Well, shall I go on again?' says he.  'Can you follow me?'

'Oh, by all means!' said I, and mopped my streaming face upon my
sleeve, for you may be sure in those days I had no handkerchief.

'If you are sure you can follow me.  That was a very sudden and
sharp seizure,' he said doubtfully.  'But if you are sure, all
right, and here goes.  An affair of honour among you fellows would,
naturally, be a little difficult to carry out, perhaps it would be
impossible to have it wholly regular.  And yet a duel might be very
irregular in form, and, under the peculiar circumstances of the
case, loyal enough in effect.  Do you take me?  Now, as a gentleman
and a soldier.'

His hand rose again at the words and hovered over me.  I could bear
no more, and winced away from him.  'No,' I cried,  'not that.  Do
not put your hand upon my shoulder.  I cannot bear it.  It is
rheumatism,' I made haste to add.  'My shoulder is inflamed and
very painful.'

He returned to his chair and deliberately lighted a cigar.

'I am sorry about your shoulder,' he said at last.  'Let me send
for the doctor.'

'Not in the least,' said I.  'It is a trifle.  I am quite used to
it.  It does not trouble me in the smallest.  At any rate, I don't
believe in doctors.'

'All right,' said he, and sat and smoked a good while in a silence
which I would have given anything to break.  'Well,' he began
presently, 'I believe there is nothing left for me to learn.  I
presume I may say that I know all.'

'About what?' said I boldly.

'About Goguelat,' said he.

'I beg your pardon.  I cannot conceive,' said I.

'Oh,' says the major, 'the man fell in a duel, and by your hand!  I
am not an infant.'

'By no means,' said I.  'But you seem to me to be a good deal of a
theorist.'

'Shall we test it?' he asked.  'The doctor is close by.  If there
is not an open wound on your shoulder, I am wrong.  If there is--'
He waved his hand.  'But I advise you to think twice.  There is a
deuce of a nasty drawback to the experiment--that what might have
remained private between us two becomes public property.'

'Oh, well!' said I, with a laugh, 'anything rather than a doctor!
I cannot bear the breed.'

His last words had a good deal relieved me, but I was still far
from comfortable.

Major Chevenix smoked awhile, looking now at his cigar ash, now at
me.  'I'm a soldier myself,' he says presently, 'and I've been out
in my time and hit my man.  I don't want to run any one into a
corner for an affair that was at all necessary or correct.  At the
same time, I want to know that much, and I'll take your word of
honour for it.  Otherwise, I shall be very sorry, but the doctor
must be called in.'

'I neither admit anything nor deny anything,' I returned.  'But if
this form of words will suffice you, here is what I say:  I give
you my parole, as a gentleman and a soldier, there has nothing
taken place amongst us prisoners that was not honourable as the
day.'

'All right,' says he.  'That was all I wanted.  You can go now,
Champdivers.'

And as I was going out he added, with a laugh:  'By the bye, I
ought to apologise:  I had no idea I was applying the torture!'

The same afternoon the doctor came into the courtyard with a piece
of paper in his hand.  He seemed hot and angry, and had certainly
no mind to be polite.

'Here!' he cried.  'Which of you fellows knows any English?  Oh!'--
spying me--'there you are, what's your name!  YOU'LL do.  Tell
these fellows that the other fellow's dying.  He's booked; no use
talking; I expect he'll go by evening.  And tell them I don't envy
the feelings of the fellow who spiked him.  Tell them that first.'

I did so.

'Then you can tell 'em,' he resumed, 'that the fellow, Goggle--
what's his name?--wants to see some of them before he gets his
marching orders.  If I got it right, he wants to kiss or embrace
you, or some sickening stuff.  Got that?  Then here's a list he's
had written, and you'd better read it out to them--I can't make
head or tail of your beastly names--and they can answer PRESENT,
and fall in against that wall.'

It was with a singular movement of incongruous feelings that I read
the first name on the list.  I had no wish to look again on my own
handiwork; my flesh recoiled from the idea; and how could I be sure
what reception he designed to give me?  The cure was in my own
hand; I could pass that first name over--the doctor would not know-
-and I might stay away.  But to the subsequent great gladness of my
heart, I did not dwell for an instant on the thought, walked over
to the designated wall, faced about, read out the name
'Champdivers,' and answered myself with the word 'Present.'

There were some half dozen on the list, all told; and as soon as we
were mustered, the doctor led the way to the hospital, and we
followed after, like a fatigue party, in single file.  Quäcola
crouched on the balcony and grabbed after flying. He was wearing red
trousers and a blue jacket with silver buttons, which he constantly
pulled. In the kitchen, however, took place between servant and
cook the following dialogue: The cook, the cattle would be awarded
with arsenic. Emil: Does nothing. It is a magician. It has the
Lord bewitches. The cook: Do, it is still a bad end. Emil: Every
night I dream of him and it sits me on the head and eat my hair
off, as if the grass would be's. Well, I just go, man has his
dignity. The cook: Oh God! That it so far with the people has come.
I can not stay in a house where a monkey performs the regiment.

Who knows, representing a given zustößt.I drew near with
incredible shrinkings, and surrendered myself to his arms with
overwhelming disgust.  But he only drew my ear down to his lips.

'Trust me,' he whispered.  'Je suis bon bougre, moi.  I'll take it
to hell with me, and tell the devil.'

Why should I go on to reproduce his grossness and trivialities?
All that he thought, at that hour, was even noble, though he could
not clothe it otherwise than in the language of a brutal farce.
Presently he bade me call the doctor; and when that officer had
come in, raised a little up in his bed, pointed first to himself
and then to me, who stood weeping by his side, and several times
repeated the expression, 'Frinds--frinds--dam frinds.'

To my great surprise, the doctor appeared very much affected.  He
nodded his little bob-wigged head at us, and said repeatedly, 'All
right, Johnny--me comprong.'

Then Goguelat shook hands with me, embraced me again, and I went
out of the room sobbing like an infant.

How often have I not seen it, that the most unpardonable fellows
make the happiest exits!  It is a fate we may well envy them.
Goguelat was detested in life; in the last three days, by his
admirable staunchness and consideration, he won every heart; and
when word went about the prison the same evening that he was no
more, the voice of conversation became hushed as in a house of
mourning.

For myself I was like a man distracted; I cannot think what ailed
me:  when I awoke the following day, nothing remained of it; but
that night I was filled with a gloomy fury of the nerves.  I had
killed him; he had done his utmost to protect me; I had seen him
with that awful smile.  And so illogical and useless is this
sentiment of remorse, that I was ready, at a word or a look, to
quarrel with somebody else.  I presume the disposition of my mind
was imprinted on my face; and when, a little after, I overtook,
saluted and addressed the doctor, he looked on me with
commiseration and surprise.

I had asked him if it was true.

'Yes,' he said, 'the fellow's gone.'

'Did he suffer much?' I asked.

'Devil a bit; passed away like a lamb,' said he.  He looked on me a
little, and I saw his hand go to his fob.  'Here, take that! no
sense in fretting,' he said, and, putting a silver two-penny-bit in
my hand, he left me.

I should have had that twopenny framed to hang upon the wall, for
it was the man's one act of charity in all my knowledge of him.
Instead of that, I stood looking at it in my hand and laughed out
bitterly, as I realised his mistake; then went to the ramparts, and
flung it far into the air like blood money.  The night was falling;
through an embrasure and across the gardened valley I saw the
lamplighters hasting along Princes Street with ladder and lamp, and
looked on moodily.  As I was so standing a hand was laid upon my
shoulder, and I turned about.  It was Major Chevenix, dressed for
the evening, and his neckcloth really admirably folded.  I never
denied the man could dress.

'Ah!' said he, 'I thought it was you, Champdivers.  So he's gone?'

I nodded.

'Come, come,' said he, 'you must cheer up.  Of course it's very
distressing, very painful and all that.  But do you know, it ain't
such a bad thing either for you or me?  What with his death and
your visit to him I am entirely reassured.'

So I was to owe my life to Goguelat at every point.

'I had rather not discuss it,' said I.

'Well,' said he, 'one word more, and I'll agree to bury the
subject.  What did you fight about?'

'Oh, what do men ever fight about?' I cried.

'A lady?' said he.

I shrugged my shoulders.

'Deuce you did!' said he.  'I should scarce have thought it of
him.'

And at this my ill-humour broke fairly out in words.  'He!' I
cried.  'He never dared to address her--only to look at her and
vomit his vile insults!  She may have given him sixpence:  if she
did, it may take him to heaven yet!'

At this I became aware of his eyes set upon me with a considering
look, and brought up sharply.

'Well, well,' said he.  'Good night to you, Champdivers.  Come to
me at breakfast-time to-morrow, and we'll talk of other subjects.'

I fully admit the man's conduct was not bad:  in writing it down so
long after the events I can even see that it was good.


CHAPTER IV--ST. IVES GETS A BUNDLE OF BANK NOTES


I was surprised one morning, shortly after, to find myself the
object of marked consideration by a civilian and a stranger.  This
was a man of the middle age; he had a face of a mulberry colour,
round black eyes, comical tufted eyebrows, and a protuberant
forehead; and was dressed in clothes of a Quakerish cut.  In spite
of his plainness, he had that inscrutable air of a man well-to-do
in his affairs.  I conceived he had been some while observing me
from a distance, for a sparrow sat betwixt us quite unalarmed on
the breech of a piece of cannon.  So soon as our eyes met, he drew
near and addressed me in the French language, which he spoke with a
good fluency but an abominable accent.

'I have the pleasure of addressing Monsieur le Vicomte Anne de
Keroual de Saint-Yves?' said he.

'Well,' said I, 'I do not call myself all that; but I have a right
to, if I chose.  In the meanwhile I call myself plain Champdivers,
at your disposal.  It was my mother's name, and good to go
soldiering with.'

'I think not quite,' said he; 'for if I remember rightly, your
mother also had the particle.  Her name was Florimonde de
Champdivers.'

'Right again!' said I, 'and I am extremely pleased to meet a
gentleman so well informed in my quarterings.  Is monsieur Born
himself?'  This I said with a great air of assumption, partly to
conceal the degree of curiosity with which my visitor had inspired
me, and in part because it struck me as highly incongruous and
comical in my prison garb and on the lips of a private soldier.

He seemed to think so too, for he laughed.

'No, sir,' he returned, speaking this time in English; 'I am not
"BORN," as you call it, and must content myself with DYING, of
which I am equally susceptible with the best of you.  My name is
Mr. Romaine--Daniel Romaine--a solicitor of London City, at your
service; and, what will perhaps interest you more, I am here at the
request of your great-uncle, the Count.'

'What!' I cried, 'does M. de Keroual de St.-Yves remember the
existence of such a person as myself, and will he deign to count
kinship with a soldier of Napoleon?'

'You speak English well,' observed my visitor.

'It has been a second language to me from a child,' said I.  'I had
an English nurse; my father spoke English with me; and I was
finished by a countryman of yours and a dear friend of mine, a Mr.
Vicary.'

A strong expression of interest came into the lawyer's face.

'What!' he cried, 'you knew poor Vicary?'

'For more than a year,' said I; 'and shared his hiding-place for
many months.'

'And I was his clerk, and have succeeded him in business,' said he.
'Excellent man!  It was on the affairs of M. de Keroual that he
went to that accursed country, from which he was never destined to
return.  Do you chance to know his end, sir?'

'I am sorry,' said I, 'I do.  He perished miserably at the hands of
a gang of banditti, such as we call chauffeurs.  In a word, he was
tortured, and died of it.  See,' I added, kicking off one shoe, for
I had no stockings; 'I was no more than a child, and see how they
had begun to treat myself.'

He looked at the mark of my old burn with a certain shrinking.
'Beastly people!' I heard him mutter to himself.

'The English may say so with a good grace,' I observed politely.

Such speeches were the coin in which I paid my way among this
credulous race.  Ninety per cent. of our visitors would have
accepted the remark as natural in itself and creditable to my
powers of judgment, but it appeared my lawyer was more acute.

'You are not entirely a fool, I perceive,' said he.

'No,' said I; 'not wholly.'

'And yet it is well to beware of the ironical mood,' he continued.
'It is a dangerous instrument.  Your great-uncle has, I believe,
practised it very much, until it is now become a problem what he
means.'

