By the end of a week things had quieted down again; the wild intoxication
of pride and joy had sobered to a soft, sweet, silent delight--a sort of
deep, nameless, unutterable content.  All faces bore a look of peaceful,
holy happiness.

Then a change came.  It was a gradual change; so gradual that its
beginnings were hardly noticed; maybe were not noticed at all, except by
Jack Halliday, who always noticed everything; and always made fun of it,
too, no matter what it was.  He began to throw out chaffing remarks about
people not looking quite so happy as they did a day or two ago; and next
he claimed that the new aspect was deepening to positive sadness; next,
that it was taking on a sick look; and finally he said that everybody was
become so moody, thoughtful, and absent-minded that he could rob the
meanest man in town of a cent out of the bottom of his breeches pocket
and not disturb his reverie.

At this stage--or at about this stage--a saying like this was dropped at
bedtime--with a sigh, usually--by the head of each of the nineteen
principal households:

"Ah, what _could_ have been the remark that Goodson made?"

And straightway--with a shudder--came this, from the man's wife:

"Oh, _don't_!  What horrible thing are you mulling in your mind?  Put it
away from you, for God's sake!"

But that question was wrung from those men again the next night--and got
the same retort.  But weaker.

And the third night the men uttered the question yet again--with anguish,
and absently.  This time--and the following night--the wives fidgeted
feebly, and tried to say something.  But didn't.

And the night after that they found their tongues and
responded--longingly:

"Oh, if we _could_ only guess!"

Halliday's comments grew daily more and more sparklingly disagreeable and
disparaging.  He went diligently about, laughing at the town,
individually and in mass.  But his laugh was the only one left in the
village: it fell upon a hollow and mournful vacancy and emptiness.  Not
even a smile was findable anywhere.  Halliday carried a cigar-box around
on a tripod, playing that it was a camera, and halted all passers and
aimed the thing and said "Ready!--now look pleasant, please," but not
even this capital joke could surprise the dreary faces into any
softening.

So three weeks passed--one week was left.  It was Saturday evening after
supper.  Instead of the aforetime Saturday-evening flutter and bustle and
shopping and larking, the streets were empty and desolate.  Richards and
his old wife sat apart in their little parlour--miserable and thinking.
This was become their evening habit now: the life-long habit which had
preceded it, of reading, knitting, and contented chat, or receiving or
paying neighbourly calls, was dead and gone and forgotten, ages ago--two
or three weeks ago; nobody talked now, nobody read, nobody visited--the
whole village sat at home, sighing, worrying, silent.  Trying to guess
out that remark.

The postman left a letter.  Richards glanced listlessly at the
superscription and the post-mark--unfamiliar, both--and tossed the letter
on the table and resumed his might-have-beens and his hopeless dull
miseries where he had left them off.  Two or three hours later his wife
got wearily up and was going away to bed without a good-night--custom
now--but she stopped near the letter and eyed it awhile with a dead
interest, then broke it open, and began to skim it over.  Richards,
sitting there with his chair tilted back against the wall and his chin
between his knees, heard something fall.  It was his wife.  He sprang to
her side, but she cried out:

"Leave me alone, I am too happy.  Read the letter--read it!"

He did.  He devoured it, his brain reeling.  The letter was from a
distant State, and it said:

   "I am a stranger to you, but no matter: I have something to tell.  I
   have just arrived home from Mexico, and learned about that episode.  Of
   course you do not know who made that remark, but I know, and I am the
   only person living who does know.  It was GOODSON.  I knew him well,
   many years ago.  I passed through your village that very night, and
   was his guest till the midnight train came along.  I overheard him
   make that remark to the stranger in the dark--it was in Hale Alley.  He
   and I talked of it the rest of the way home, and while smoking in his
   house.  He mentioned many of your villagers in the course of his
   talk--most of them in a very uncomplimentary way, but two or three
   favourably: among these latter yourself.  I say 'favourably'--nothing
   stronger.  I remember his saying he did not actually LIKE any person
   in the town--not one; but that you--I THINK he said you--am almost
   sure--had done him a very great service once, possibly without knowing
   the full value of it, and he wished he had a fortune, he would leave
   it to you when he died, and a curse apiece for the rest of the
   citizens.  Now, then, if it was you that did him that service, you are
   his legitimate heir, and entitled to the sack of gold.  I know that I
   can trust to your honour and honesty, for in a citizen of Hadleyburg
   these virtues are an unfailing inheritance, and so I am going to
   reveal to you the remark, well satisfied that if you are not the right
   man you will seek and find the right one and see that poor Goodson's
   debt of gratitude for the service referred to is paid.  This is the
   remark 'YOU ARE FAR FROM BEING A BAD MAN: GO, AND REFORM.'

   "HOWARD L. STEPHENSON."

"Oh, Edward, the money is ours, and I am so grateful, _oh_, so
grateful,--kiss me, dear, it's for ever since we kissed--and we needed it
so--the money--and now you are free of Pinkerton and his bank, and
nobody's slave any more; it seems to me I could fly for joy."

It was a happy half-hour that the couple spent there on the settee
caressing each other; it was the old days come again--days that had begun
with their courtship and lasted without a break till the stranger brought
the deadly money.  By-and-by the wife said:

"Oh, Edward, how lucky it was you did him that grand service, poor
Goodson!  I never liked him, but I love him now.  And it was fine and
beautiful of you never to mention it or brag about it."  Then, with a
touch of reproach, "But you ought to have told _me_, Edward, you ought to
have told your wife, you know."

"Well, I--er--well, Mary, you see--"

"Now stop hemming and hawing, and tell me about it, Edward.  I always
loved you, and now I'm proud of you.  Everybody believes there was only
one good generous soul in this village, and now it turns out that
you--Edward, why don't you tell me?"

"Well--er--er--Why, Mary, I can't!"

"You _can't_?  _Why_ can't you?"

"You see, he--well, he--he made me promise I wouldn't."

The wife looked him over, and said, very slowly:

"Made--you--promise?  Edward, what do you tell me that for?"

"Mary, do you think I would lie?"

She was troubled and silent for a moment, then she laid her hand within
his and said:

"No . . . no.  We have wandered far enough from our bearings--God spare
us that!  In all your life you have never uttered a lie.  But now--now
that the foundations of things seem to be crumbling from under us,
we--we--"  She lost her voice for a moment, then said, brokenly, "Lead us
not into temptation. . . I think you made the promise, Edward.  Let it
rest so.  Let us keep away from that ground.  Now--that is all gone by;
let us he happy again; it is no time for clouds."

Edward found it something of an effort to comply, for his mind kept
wandering--trying to remember what the service was that he had done
Goodson.

The couple lay awake the most of the night, Mary happy and busy, Edward
busy, but not so happy.  Mary was planning what she would do with the
money.  Edward was trying to recall that service.  At first his
conscience was sore on account of the lie he had told Mary--if it was a
lie.  After much reflection--suppose it _was_ a lie?  What then?  Was it
such a great matter?  Aren't we always _acting_ lies?  Then why not tell
them?  Look at Mary--look what she had done.  While he was hurrying off
on his honest errand, what was she doing?  Lamenting because the papers
hadn't been destroyed and the money kept.  Is theft better than lying?

_That_ point lost its sting--the lie dropped into the background and left
comfort behind it.  The next point came to the front: _had_ he rendered
that service?  Well, here was Goodson's own evidence as reported in
Stephenson's letter; there could be no better evidence than that--it was
even _proof_ that he had rendered it.  Of course.  So that point was
settled. . . No, not quite.  He recalled with a wince that this unknown
Mr. Stephenson was just a trifle unsure as to whether the performer of it
was Richards or some other--and, oh dear, he had put Richards on his
honour!  He must himself decide whither that money must go--and Mr.
Stephenson was not doubting that if he was the wrong man he would go
honourably and find the right one.  Oh, it was odious to put a man in
such a situation--ah, why couldn't Stephenson have left out that doubt?
What did he want to intrude that for?

Further reflection.  How did it happen that _Richards's_ name remained in
Stephenson's mind as indicating the right man, and not some other man's
name?  That looked good.  Yes, that looked very good.  In fact it went on
looking better and better, straight along--until by-and-by it grew into
positive _proof_.  And then Richards put the matter at once out of his
mind, for he had a private instinct that a proof once established is
better left so.

He was feeling reasonably comfortable now, but there was still one other
detail that kept pushing itself on his notice: of course he had done that
service--that was settled; but what _was_ that service?  He must recall
it--he would not go to sleep till he had recalled it; it would make his
peace of mind perfect.  And so he thought and thought.  He thought of a
dozen things--possible services, even probable services--but none of them
seemed adequate, none of them seemed large enough, none of them seemed
worth the money--worth the fortune Goodson had wished he could leave in
his will.  And besides, he couldn't remember having done them, anyway.
Now, then--now, then--what _kind_ of a service would it be that would
make a man so inordinately grateful?  Ah--the saving of his soul!  That
must be it.  Yes, he could remember, now, how he once set himself the
task of converting Goodson, and laboured at it as much as--he was going
to say three months; but upon closer examination it shrunk to a month,
then to a week, then to a day, then to nothing.  Yes, he remembered now,
and with unwelcome vividness, that Goodson had told him to go to thunder
and mind his own business--_he_ wasn't hankering to follow Hadleyburg to
heaven!

So that solution was a failure--he hadn't saved Goodson's soul.  Richards
was discouraged.  Then after a little came another idea: had he saved
Goodson's property?  No, that wouldn't do--he hadn't any.  His life?  That
is it!  Of course.  Why, he might have thought of it before.  This time
he was on the right track, sure.  His imagination-mill was hard at work
in a minute, now.

Thereafter, during a stretch of two exhausting hours, he was busy saving
Goodson's life.  He saved it in all kinds of difficult and perilous ways.
In every case he got it saved satisfactorily up to a certain point; then,
just as he was beginning to get well persuaded that it had really
happened, a troublesome detail would turn up which made the whole thing
impossible.  As in the matter of drowning, for instance.  In that case he
had swum out and tugged Goodson ashore in an unconscious state with a
great crowd looking on and applauding, but when he had got it all thought
out and was just beginning to remember all about it, a whole swarm of
disqualifying details arrived on the ground: the town would have known of
the circumstance, Mary would have known of it, it would glare like a
limelight in his own memory instead of being an inconspicuous service
which he had possibly rendered "without knowing its full value."  And at
this point he remembered that he couldn't swim anyway.

Ah--_there_ was a point which he had been overlooking from the start: it
had to be a service which he had rendered "possibly without knowing the
full value of it."  Why, really, that ought to be an easy hunt--much
easier than those others.  And sure enough, by-and-by he found it.
Goodson, years and years ago, came near marrying a very sweet and pretty
girl, named Nancy Hewitt, but in some way or other the match had been
broken off; the girl died, Goodson remained a bachelor, and by-and-by
became a soured one and a frank despiser of the human species.  Soon
after the girl's death the village found out, or thought it had found
out, that she carried a spoonful of negro blood in her veins.  Richards
worked at these details a good while, and in the end he thought he
remembered things concerning them which must have gotten mislaid in his
memory through long neglect.  He seemed to dimly remember that it was
_he_ that found out about the negro blood; that it was he that told the
village; that the village told Goodson where they got it; that he thus
saved Goodson from marrying the tainted girl; that he had done him this
great service "without knowing the full value of it," in fact without
knowing that he _was_ doing it; but that Goodson knew the value of it,
and what a narrow escape he had had, and so went to his grave grateful to
his benefactor and wishing he had a fortune to leave him.  It was all
clear and simple, now, and the more he went over it the more luminous and
certain it grew; and at last, when he nestled to sleep, satisfied and
happy, he remembered the whole thing just as if it had been yesterday.  In
fact, he dimly remembered Goodson's _telling_ him his gratitude once.
Meantime Mary had spent six thousand dollars on a new house for herself
and a pair of slippers for her pastor, and then had fallen peacefully to
rest.

That same Saturday evening the postman had delivered a letter to each of
the other principal citizens--nineteen letters in all.  No two of the
envelopes were alike, and no two of the superscriptions were in the same
hand, but the letters inside were just like each other in every detail
but one.  They were exact copies of the letter received by
Richards--handwriting and all--and were all signed by Stephenson, but in
place of Richards's name each receiver's own name appeared.

All night long eighteen principal citizens did what their caste-brother
Richards was doing at the same time--they put in their energies trying to
remember what notable service it was that they had unconsciously done
Barclay Goodson.  In no case was it a holiday job; still they succeeded.

And while they were at this work, which was difficult, their wives put in
the night spending the money, which was easy.  During that one night the
nineteen wives spent an average of seven thousand dollars each out of the
forty thousand in the sack--a hundred and thirty-three thousand
altogether.

