Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


THE COXSWAIN'S BRIDE, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 1.

THE RISING TIDE--A TALE OF THE SEA.

The coxswain went by the name of Sturdy Bob among his mates.  Among the
women of the village he was better known as handsome Bob, and, looking
at him, you could not help seeing that both titles were appropriate, for
our coxswain was broad and strong as well as good-looking, with that
peculiar cast of features and calm decided manner which frequently
distinguish the men who are born to lead their fellows.

Robert Massey, though quite young, was already a leader of men--not only
by nature but by profession--being coxswain of the Greyton lifeboat,
and, truly, the men who followed his lead had need to be made of good
stuff, with bold, enthusiastic, self-sacrificing spirits, for he often
led them into scenes of wild--but, hold!  We must not forecast.

Well, we introduce our hero to the reader on a calm September evening,
which blazed with sunshine.  The sun need not have been mentioned,
however, but for the fact that it converted the head of a fair-haired
fisher-girl, seated beside Bob, into a ball of rippling gold, and
suffused her young cheeks with a glow that rudely intensified her
natural colour.

She was the coxswain's bride-elect, and up to that date the course of
their true love had run quite smoothly in spite of adverse proverbs.

"I can't believe my luck," said Bob, gravely.

He said most things gravely, though there was not a man in Greyton who
could laugh more heartily than he at a good joke.

"What luck do you mean, Bob?" asked Nellie Carr, lifting her eyes from
the net she was mending, and fixing them on the coxswain's bronzed face
with an air of charming innocence.  Then, becoming suddenly aware of
what he meant without being told, she gave vent to a quick little laugh,
dropped her eyes on the net, and again became intent on repairs.

"To think," continued Bob, taking two or three draws at his short pipe--
for our hero was not perfect, being, like so many of his class,
afflicted with the delusion of tobacco!--"to think that there'll be no
Nellie Carr to-morrow afternoon, only a Mrs Massey!  The tide o' my
life is risin' fast, Nellie--almost at flood now.  It seems too good to
be true--"

"Right you are, boy," interrupted a gruff but hearty voice, as a burly
fisherman "rolled" round the stern of the boat, in front of which the
lovers were seated on the sand.  "W'en my Moggie an' me was a-coortin'
we thought, an' said, it was too good to be true, an' so it was;
leastwise it was too true to be good, for Moggie took me for better an'
wuss, though it stood to reason I couldn't be both, d'ee see? an' I soon
found her wuss than better, which--"

"Come, come, Joe Slag," cried Bob, "let's have none o' your ill-omened
growls to-night.  What brings you here?"

"I've comed for the key o' the lifeboat," returned Slag, with a knowing
glance at Nellie.  "If the glass ain't tellin' lies we may have use for
her before long."

Massey pulled the key from his pocket, and gave it to Slag, who was his
bowman, and who, with the exception of himself, was the best man of the
lifeboat crew.

"I'll have to follow him," said Bob, rising soon after his mate had
left, "so good-bye, Nellie, till to-morrow."

He did not stoop to kiss her, for the wide sands lay before them with
fisher-boys playing thereon--apparently in their fathers' boots and
sou'-westers--and knots of observant comrades scattered about.

His hands were beautiful gordezuelas and wearing rings of old could not
get him because his flesh had grown and no gold.

Thirty-odd years and was the widow of an affluent businessman of
Candelario.

Pimenta Why call something that is not known, but some said they picaba
long and awkward in the manner of chilli. You could go to the store
to see her office.

She was prestidigitator like the fritters, and seemed to be miraculously
multiplied to get their hands though, collect, count and return,
all while chatting or a single moment.

Huge cauldrons butter white foam occupied one end of the counter, and it
was nice to see that softness sliding fat emeralds and diamonds stuck
on the fingers of Nazario.

Sometimes those fingers, blood red, ocupábanse in the industrial genre
Candelario, but soon recovered her beauty wallow in soap foam and
crushed in clean water to be like gold and fine as silk. Yet dags are
giving a slap.

-XI - What is offered to you, gentleman? - Is that Mr. Tables - Perico
you want to say. This is no time. - That is, D. Pedro Lopez. - Not as
high. Pique lower. - Were you can see, yes or no - I think he is sleeping.
Suba you ....

Eh, you, Rumalda ... go with this gentleman .... Tell Perico shame that
if you do not have to sleep at this time. Romualda encanijada was a woman
dressed in rags and in the store immediately helped the woman to the
patches strung donuts. Romualda The appearance of being so affected
by the pallor and dirt, they could not say whether it was ugly or
pretty. Same difficulty had to declare girl or woman, and so is
less susceptible to errors that did not have any age.

The phenomenon (because otherwise it was not called in the district)
began to walk ahead of Salvador to guide him. But as the phenomenon
cojeaba neither could go quickly. It took several minutes to win the
ladder, which equaled the crookedness dark revolts the conscience of
a murderer. To say something during the annoyance of such painful
climb, Salvador asked her if it was the family of Mr. Tables. - My father
- said the cojuela. - I do not think - "said the gentleman -- . Mr.
and Mrs. Nazario Tables are apparently in very good position. The
phenomenon did not say anything, and continued to climb.

Seemed to rise with one foot. Detúvose to get up to catch your breath.
Surely no more than a breathing lung. - Were you tired, gentleman? - No
such ... third floor. The ladder is not long, and go up as well if it
were not dark .... Yes you're tired. How many times a day get? The
phenomenon was thinking. Finally, he said: - Some sixty times. - It is
good income, a daughter. Three thousand steps a day. - With little
more to the sky.

Romualda said no more, and entering the house woke Pedro Lopez, who around
me like a song. Since the room had expected to see the fun prints of
saints and toreros covering the walls, heard the grunts of athletes
Salvador to be ripped from his sweet dream by the hand of rough and oily
phenomenon. Heard after desperezos and imprecations, then ronquísima a
voice saying: - Low to the store and get me a cigar left in the
drawer of the big desk.

Shortly after Salvador and tables are greeted in the room. They spoke
with interest a long time and finally said Lopez - Let's go for coffee,
lunch and talk about that slowly. Here you can not talk about anything.
Nazario is very re-curious and want to know everything. We were. Found
in the stairwell to the phenomenon, after having risen for the
cigarettes to Mr. Tables back to top (oh Christ down from the cross!)
In search of salt for a fried egg that was eating Mrs. Nazario . We
understand the latter and not insignificant detail that the beautiful
bouchère had completed the release of the morning.

Could at last enjoy some rest after that horrific struggle to cut, weigh,
and charge back, and the embers of him dressed buñolería the patches of
a light lunch. Behind the counter put his table Nazario; washed hands
and arms to the elbow; quitábase that horrible apron that would serve
little earlier, and accompanied by some discreet friend of the next
tent or canvas was the wife of vintner, restored their forces.

Then used to take a pad with some sewing, and every head back to another
store to say: - "Rumalda upload and get me the thimble ...».
Little Lizzie,
pale and silent from terror, clung to her grandfather's neck; the young
widow to his disengaged arm.  With the other arm the old man held on to
a brass rod, and prevented all three from being swept to leeward, where
several of the women and children were already struggling to escape from
a mass of water and wrecked furniture.

"Come on deck--all hands!" shouted a hoarse voice, as one of the
officers leaped into the cabin, followed by several men, who assisted
the people to rise.

It is usual to keep passengers below as much as possible in such
circumstances, but the position of the schooner, with her bow high on a
bank, and her stern deep in the water, rendered a different course
needful on this occasion.

With difficulty the passengers were got up to the bow, where they
clustered and clung about the windlass and other points of vantage.
Then it was that the true nature of their calamity was revealed, for no
land was visible, nothing was to be seen around them but a hell of
raging foam, which, in the almost total darkness of the night, leaped
and glimmered as if with phosphoric light.  Beyond this circle of, as it
were, wild lambent flame, all was black, like a wall of ebony, from out
of which continually there rushed into view coiling, curling,
hoary-headed monsters, in the shape of roaring billows, which burst upon
and over them, deluging the decks, and causing the timbers of the ship
to writhe as if in pain.

"We've got on the tail o' the sands," muttered a sailor to some one as
he passed, axe in hand, to cut away the wreckage of the masts, which
were pounding and tugging alongside.

On the sands!  Yes, but no sands were visible, for they had struck on an
outlying bank, far from shore, over which the ocean swept like the besom
of destruction.

It was nearly low water at the time of the disaster.  As the tide fell
the wreck ceased to heave.  Then it became possible for the seamen to
move about without clinging to shrouds and stanchions for very life.

"Fetch a rocket, Jim," said the captain to one of the men.

Jim obeyed, and soon a whizzing line of light was seen athwart the black
sky.

"They'll never see it," muttered the first mate, as he got ready another
rocket.  "Weather's too thick."

Several rockets were fired, and then, to make more sure of attracting
the lifeboat men, a tar-barrel, fastened to the end of a spar, was
thrust out ahead and set on fire.  By the grand lurid flare of this
giant torch the surrounding desolation was made more apparent, and at
the fearful sight hearts which had hitherto held up began to sink in
despair.

The mate's fears seemed to be well grounded, for no answering signal was
seen to rise from the land, towards which every eye was anxiously
strained.  One hour passed, then another, and another, but still no help
came.  Then the tide began to rise, and with it, of course, the danger
to increase.  All this time rockets had been sent up at intervals, and
tar-barrels had been kept burning.

"We had better make the women and children fast, sir," suggested the
mate, as a heavy mass of spray burst over the bulwarks and drenched
them.

"Do so," replied the captain, gathering up a coil of rope to assist in
the work.

"Is this necessary?" asked the widow, as the captain approached her.

"I fear it is," he replied.  "The tide is rising fast.  In a short time
the waves will be breaking over us again, and you will run a chance of
bein' swept away if we don't make you fast.  But don't despair, they
must have seen our signals by this time, an' we shall soon have the
lifeboat out."

"God grant it," murmured the widow, fervently, as she strained poor
little trembling Lizzie to her breast.

But as the moments flew by and no succour came, some gave way altogether
and moaned piteously, while others appeared to be bereft of all capacity
of thought or action.  Many began to pray in frantic incoherence, and
several gave vent to their feelings in curses.  Only a few maintained
absolute self-possession and silence.  Among these were the widow and
one or two of the other women.

They were in this condition when one of the crew who had been noted as a
first-rate singer of sea songs, and the "life of the fo'c's'l," had
occasion to pass the spot where the passengers were huddled under the
lee of the starboard bulwarks.

"Is there never a one of ye," he asked, almost sternly, "who can pray
like a Christian without screechin'?  You don't suppose the Almighty's
deaf, do you?"

This unexpected speech quieted the noisy ones, and one of the women,
turning to a man beside her, said, "You pray for us, Joe."

Joe was one of those who had remained, from the first, perfectly still,
except when required to move, or when those near him needed assistance.
He was a grave elderly man, whose quiet demeanour, dress, and general
appearance, suggested the idea of a city missionary--an idea which was
strengthened when, in obedience to the woman's request, he promptly
prayed, in measured sentences, yet with intense earnestness, for
deliverance--first from sin and then from impending death--in the name
of Jesus.  His petition was very short, and it was barely finished when
a wave of unusual size struck the vessel with tremendous violence, burst
over the side and almost swept every one into the sea.  Indeed, it was
evident that some of the weaker of the party would have perished then if
they had not been secured to the vessel with ropes.

It seemed like a stern refusal of the prayer, and was regarded as such
by some of the despairing ones, when a sudden cheer was heard and a
light resembling a great star was seen to burst from the darkness to
windward.

"The lifeboat!" shouted the captain, and they cheered with as much
hearty joy as if they were already safe.

A few minutes more and the familiar blue and white boat of mercy leaped
out of darkness into the midst of the foaming waters like a living
creature.

It was the boat from the neighbouring port of Brentley.  Either the
storm-drift had not been so thick in that direction as in the
neighbourhood of Greyton, or the Brentley men had kept a better
look-out.  She had run down to the wreck under sail.  On reaching it--a
short distant to windward--the sail was lowered, the anchor dropped, the
cable payed out, and the boat eased down until it was under the lee of
the wreck.  But the first joy at her appearance quickly died out of the
hearts of some, who were ignorant of the powers of lifeboats and
lifeboat men, when the little craft was seen at one moment tossed on the
leaping foam till on a level with the ship's bulwarks, at the next
moment far down in the swirling waters under the mizzen chains; now
sheering off as if about to forsake them altogether; anon rushing at
their sides with a violence that threatened swift destruction to the
boat; never for one instant still; always tugging and plunging like a
mad thing.  "How can we ever get into that?" was the thought that
naturally sprang into the minds of some, with chilling power.

Those, however, who understood the situation better, had more legitimate
ground for anxiety, for they knew that the lifeboat, if loaded to its
utmost capacity, could not carry more than half the souls that had to be
saved.  On becoming aware of this the men soon began to reveal their
true characters.  The unselfish and gentle made way for the women and
children.  The coarse and brutal, casting shame and every manly feeling
aside, struggled to the front with oaths and curses, some of them even
using that false familiar motto, "Every man for himself, and God for us
all!"

But these received a check at the gangway, for there stood the captain,
revolver in hand.  He spoke but one word--"back," and the cravens slunk
away.  The mild man who had offered prayer sat on the ship's bulwarks
calmly looking on.  He understood the limited capacity of the boat, and
had made up his mind to die.

"Now, madam, make haste," cried the mate, pushing his way towards the
widow.

"Come, father," she said, holding out her hand; but the old man did not
move.

"There are more women and little ones," he said, "than the boat can
hold.  Good-bye, darling.  We shall meet again--up yonder.  Go."

"Never!" exclaimed the widow, springing to his side.  "I will die with
you, father!  But here, boatman, save, oh, save my child!"

No one attended to her.  At such terrible moments men cannot afford to
wait on indecision.  Other women were ready and only too glad to go.
With a sense almost of relief at the thought that separation was now
impossible, the widow strained the child to her bosom and clung to her
old father.

At that moment the report of a pistol was heard, and a man fell dead
upon the deck.  At the last moment he had resolved to risk all and
rushed to the side, intending to jump into the boat.

"Shove off," was shouted.  The boat shot from the vessel's side.  The
bowman hauled on the cable.  In a few seconds the oars were shipped, the
anchor was got in, and the overloaded but insubmergible craft
disappeared into the darkness out of which it had come.

The wretched people thus left on the wreck knew well that the boat could
not make her port, land the rescued party, and return for them under
some hours.  They also knew that the waves were increasing in power and
volume with the rising water, and that their vessel could not survive
another tide.  Can we wonder that most of them again gave way to
despair--forgetting that with God "all things are possible?"

They were not yet forsaken, however.  On the pier-head at Greyton their
signals had indeed been observed, but while the Brentley boat, owing to
its position, could run down to the wreck with all sail set, it was
impossible for that of Greyton to reach it, except by pulling slowly
against wind and tide.

The instant that Bob Massey saw the flare of the first tar-barrel he had
called out his men.  One after another they came leaping over the
rocks--eager for the God-like work of saving life.

It is one of the grand characteristics of our lifeboatmen that on being
summoned to the fight there are often far more volunteers than are
required.  Joe Slag, as in duty bound, was first to answer the call.
Then several of the younger men came running down.  Last of all--almost
too late--Tom Riley appeared, buckling on his lifebelt as he ran.  His
gait was not quite steady, and his face was flushed.  The coxswain was
quick to note these facts.

"Take that lifebelt off!" he said, sternly, when Riley came up.

No need to ask why.  The tippler knew the reason why only too well, and
he also knew that it was useless, as well as dangerous, to disobey the
coxswain.  He took off the belt at once, flung it down, and staggered
away back to his grog-shop.

A powerful young fisherman--who had felt almost heart-broken by being
refused permission to go for want of room--gladly put on the belt and
took Riley's place.  Another minute and they were out of the harbour,
battling with the billows and fighting their way inch by inch against
the howling blast.  At last they got out so far that they could hoist
sail and run with a slant for the wreck.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 2.

It was daylight by the time the Greyton lifeboat arrived at the scene of
action, but the thick, spray-charged atmosphere was almost as bad to see
through as the blackness of night.

"I'm afeared she's gone," shouted Slag to the coxswain, putting his hand
to his mouth to prevent the words being blown bodily away.

"No--I see her bearing sou'-west," was the brief reply, as Bob Massey
plied his steering oar.

A few minutes later, and the despairing people on the wreck, catching
sight of the boat, greeted her with a long, wild cheer of reviving hope.

"What is it?" asked the widow, faintly, for she had been growing
gradually weaker from prolonged exposure.

"The lifeboat, darling," said her father.  "Did I not say that He would
not forsake us?"

"Thank God!" murmured the poor woman, fervently.  "Look up, Lizzie; the
lifeboat is coming to save us!"

The child, who had been comparatively warm and sheltered, at the expense
of her mother, looked up and smiled.

Soon the boat was alongside, and much the same scene that we have
already described was re-enacted; but there were no rebels this time.
By the captain's resolute bearing at first many lives had probably been
saved.

When most of the people had been lowered into the boat--not without
great risk and many bruises--the widow, who, cowering with her father
and child under the forecastle, had been overlooked, was led to the side
with her child.

"Not together, ma'am," said the captain.  "You'd likely drop her.  Let
me lower the child down first; or come first yourself--that will be
better."

"Give Lizzie to me," said the grandfather.  "I'll hold her till you are
safe, and ready to receive her."

"Look alive, ma'am," urged one of the lifeboat men, who had scrambled on
deck to render assistance.

The widow was soon in the boat, and held out her arms for little Lizzie.
Somehow--no one could tell how--the men made a bungle of it.  Perhaps
the very fear of doing so was the cause.  Instead of being caught by the
boatmen, Lizzie slipped between the boat and the vessel into the boiling
sea.  Giving one agonised cry, the grandfather leaped after her, but the
surging boat swept in at the moment, and the old man fortunately fell
into that instead of the sea.  He was not hurt, for strong arms had been
upraised to receive him.  The little child rose above the foam as she
was whirled past the stern of the boat by a swift current.  Bob Massey
saw her little out-stretched arms.  There was no time for thought or
consideration.  With one bound the coxswain was overboard.  Next moment
the crew saw him far astern with the child in his arms.

"Get 'em all aboard _first_!" came back, even against the wind, in Bob's
powerful, deep-toned voice.

Another moment, and he was lost to sight in the boiling waste of waters.
Slag knew well what he meant.  If they should cast off the rope before
rescuing all, for the purpose of picking up the coxswain, there would be
no possibility of getting back again to the schooner, for she was fast
breaking up.  Every current and eddy about these sands was well known to
Joe Slag, also the set of the tides--besides, had not Bob got on his
lifebelt?  He felt, nevertheless, that it was a tremendous risk to let
him go.  But what could poor Slag do?  To cast off at once would have
been to sacrifice about a dozen lives for the sake of saving two.  It
was a fearful trial.  Joe loved Bob as a brother.  His heart well nigh
burst, but it stood the trial.  He did his duty, and held on to the
wreck!

Duty, on that occasion, however, was done with a promptitude, and in a
fashion, that was not usual in one of his sedate nature.  Fortunately,
none but men remained on the wreck by that time.

"Tumble 'em in--sharp!" cried Slag.

The lifeboat men obeyed literally, and tumbled them in with a celerity
that might almost have awakened surprise in a sack of potatoes!

To haul up the anchor would have been slow work.  Slag--economical by
nature--became extravagant for once.  An axe made short work of cable
and anchor.

"Let 'em go!" he growled, as the boat drifted away.

The sail was set with miraculous speed, for now the wind was in their
favour, and the gay lifeboat bounded off in the direction where Bob had
disappeared, as though it felt a lively interest in the recovery of its
coxswain.  It seemed as if the very elements sympathised with their
anxiety, for just then the gale sensibly abated, and the rising sun
broke through a rift in the grey clouds.

"There he is--I see him!" shouted the man in the bow--pointing eagerly
ahead.

"It's on'y a bit o' wreck, boy," cried a comrade.

"Right you are," returned the bowman.

"There he is, though, an' no mistake, this time.  Port!--port!
hard-a-port!"

As he spoke, the boat swept round into a sort of cross-current among the
waves, where an object resembling a man was observed spinning slowly
round like a lazy teetotum.  They were soon alongside.  A dozen
claw-like hands made a simultaneous grasp, and hauled the object on
board with a mighty cheer, for it was, indeed, the coxswain--alive,
though much exhausted--with his precious little curly-haired burden in
his arms.

The burden was also alive, and not much exhausted, for the weather was
comparatively warm at the time, and Bob had thrust her little head into
the luxuriant thicket of his beard and whiskers; and, spreading his
great hands and arms all over her little body, had also kept her well
out of the water--all which the great buoyancy of his lifebelt enabled
him easily to do.

Shall we describe the joy of the widow and the grandfather?  No; there
are some sacred matters in life which are best left to the imagination.
The sunshine which had begun to scatter the clouds, and flood both land
and sea, was typical of the joy which could find no better means than
sobs wherewith to express gratitude to the God of mercy.

We have said that the gale had begun to abate.  When the lifeboat
escaped from the turmoil of cross-seas that raged over the sands and got
into deep water, all difficulties and dangers were past, and she was
able to lay her course for Greyton harbour.

"Let's have another swig o' that cold tea," said Bob Massey, resuming
his rightful post at the helm.  "It has done me a power o' good.  I had
no notion that cold tea was so good for warmin' the cockles o' one's
heart."

Ah!  Bob Massey, it was not the cold tea, but the saving of that little
girl that sent the life's blood careering so warmly through your veins!
However, there's no harm done in putting it down to the credit of the
cold tea.  Had the tea been hot, there might have been some truth in
your fancy.

"What's the time?" asked Bob, with a sudden look of anxiety.

"Just gone ten," said Slag, consulting a chronometer that bore some
resemblance to an antique warming-pan.

The look of anxiety on the coxswain's countenance deepened.

"Ease off the sheet a bit," he said, looking sternly over the weather
quarter, and whistling for a fresher breeze, though most men would have
thought the breeze fresh enough already.

As if to accommodate him, and confirm the crew in the whistling
superstition, the breeze did increase at the moment, and sent the
lifeboat, as one of the men said, "snorin'" over the wild sea towards
the harbour of Greyton.

It was a grand sight to behold the pier of the little port on that
stormy morning.  Of course, it had soon become known that the lifeboat
was out.  Although at starting it had been seen by only a few of the old
salts--whose delight it was to recall the memory of grand stormy times
long past, by facing the gales at all hours in oiled coats and
sou'-westers--the greater part of the fishing village only became aware
of the fact on turning out to work in the morning.  We have said that
the gale had moderated, and the sun had come out, so that the pier was
crowded, not only with fisher-folk, but with visitors to the port, and
other landsmen.

Great was the hope, and sanguine the expectation of the crowd, when,
after long and anxious waiting, the lifeboat was at last descried far
out at sea, making straight for the harbour.

"All right, Bill," exclaimed an old fisherman, who had been for some
time past sweeping the horizon with his glass, "the flag's a-flyin'."

"What does that mean?" asked a smart young lady, who had braved the
blast and run the risk of a salt-wash from the sprays at the pier-end in
her eager desire to see the boat arrive.

"It means, Miss, that they've managed to save somebody--how many, in
course, we can't tell till they come."

There was a strong disposition on the part of the crowd to cheer when
this was said.

After a few minutes' further observation, the old man with the glass
murmured, as if speaking to himself, "I do believe she's chock-full o'
people."

When this was repeated, the suppressed cheer broke forth, and the
excitement increased.  Soon the people with good eyes could see for
themselves that the swiftly approaching boat was as full as she could
hold, of human beings.  At the same time, those who were in the boat
could see the swarms of sympathisers on the pier who awaited their
arrival.

But there was one man who took no note of these things, and seemed
indifferent to everything around him.  The coxswain of the lifeboat was
spiritually absent from the scene.

"You seem to've got the fidgets, Bob," remarked Joe Slag, looking
earnestly at his friend.  "That swim has been too much for 'ee."

"'Taint that, Joe," replied Bob, quickly.  "What's the time now, lad?"

Pulling out the antique warming-pan again, Slag said it was nigh a
quarter past ten, and added that he, (Bob), seemed to be "uncommon
consarned about the time o' day that mornin'."

"And so would you be, lad," returned the coxswain, in a low voice, as he
advanced his mouth to his comrade's ear, "if you was in my fix.  I've
got to be spliced this day before twelve, an' the church is more'n two
miles inland!"

"That's awk'ard," returned Slag, with a troubled look.  "But, I say,
Bob, you've kep' this uncommon close from us all--eh?  I never heerd ye
was to be spliced so soon."

"Of course I kep' it close, 'cos I wanted to give you an' my mates a
surprise, but it strikes me I'll give some other people a surprise
to-day, for there's no time to put on clean toggery."

"You'll never manage it," said Slag, in a sympathetic tone, as he once
more consulted the warming-pan.  "It's gettin' on for half arter ten
now, an' it takes a mortal time to rig out in them go-to-meetin' slops."

"Do I look anything like a bridegroom as I am?" asked the coxswain with
a curious glance.

"Sca'cely," replied Slag, surveying his friend with a grim smile--"(mind
your helm, Bob, there's a awk'ard run on the tide round the pier-head,
you know.)  No; you're not wery much like one.  Even if your toggery was
all ship-shape--which it ain't--it would stand dryin', and your hair
would be the better o' brushin'--to say nothin' o' your beard--an' it do
seem, too, as if a bit o' soap might improve your hands an' face arter
last night's work.  No, Bob, I couldn't honestly say as you're exactly
ship-shape as you stand."

"Listen, Joe Slag," said Bob Massey, with sudden earnestness.  "I've
never yet come in after a rescue without seein' the boat hauled up an'
made snug.  `Dooty first, an' pleasure arter,' that's bin my motto, as
_you_ know.  But dooty lies in another direction _this_ day, so you
promise to see her hauled up, an' cleaned, an' properly housed, won't
you?"

"In coorse I does."

"Well, then," continued Bob, in the same low, earnest tone, "arter
that's done, you'll go an' invite all our mates an' friends to a jolly
blow-out in the big shed alongside o' my old mother's house.  Don't tell
who invites 'em, or anything about it, an' ask as many as like to come--
the shed's big enough to hold 'em all.  Only be sure to make 'em
understand that they'll get no drink stronger than coffee an' tea.  If
they can't enjoy themselves on that, they may go to the grog-shop, but
they needn't come to _me_.  My mother will be there, and she'll keep 'em
in order!"

"What!" exclaimed Slag, with a look of slight surprise.  "Your mother!
Her what's bin bed-ridden for years, an' hasn't got no legs at all--
leastwise not to speak of?"

"Just so, lad.  We'll lift her in, bed an' all.  Now you be off to the
bow.  Oars out, lads; stand by the halyards!"

They were by that time close to the pier-head, where the people were
shouting and cheering, some of them even weeping, and waving hats,
'kerchiefs, sticks, and umbrellas, almost wild with joy at seeing so
many fellow-creatures rescued from the maw of the hungry sea.

The first man who leaped out when the lifeboat touched the pier was the
coxswain, dripping, dirty, and dishevelled.

"Bless you, my gallant fellow!" exclaimed an irrepressible old
enthusiast, stepping forward and attempting to grasp the coxswain's
hand.

But Bob Massey, brushing past him, ran along the pier, leaped a fence,
and sprang up the steep path that led to the cliffs, over the top of
which he was finally seen to bound and disappear.

"Poor fellow!" exclaimed the irrepressible enthusiast, looking aghast at
Slag, "exposure and excitement have driven him mad!"

"Looks like it!" replied Slag, with a quiet grin, as he stooped to
assist the widow and little Lizzie to land, while ready hands were
out-stretched to aid and congratulate the old grandfather, and the rest
of the rescued people.

The coxswain ran--ay, he ran as he had been wont to run when he was a
wild little fisher-boy--regardless alike of appearances and
consequences.  The clock of the village steeple told him that the
appointed hour had almost arrived.  Two miles was a long way to run in
heavy woollen garments and sea-boots, all soaked in sea-water.  But Bob
was young, and strong, and active, and--you understand the rest, good
reader!

The church had purposely been selected at that distance from the village
to prevent Bob's comrades from knowing anything about the wedding until
it should be over.  It was a somewhat strange fancy, but the coxswain
was a man who, having taken a fancy, was not easily turned from it.

In order to her being got comfortably ready in good time, Nellie Carr
had slept the night before at the house of an uncle, who was a farmer,
and lived near the church.  The house was in a sheltered hollow, so that
the bride was scarcely aware of the gale that had been blowing so
fiercely out at sea.  Besides, being much taken up with
cousin-bridesmaids and other matters, the thought of the lifeboat never
once entered her pretty head.

At the appointed hour, arrayed in all the splendour of a fisherman's
bride, she was led to the church, but no bridegroom was there!

"He won't be long.  He's _never_ late," whispered a bridesmaid to
anxious Nellie.

Minutes flew by, and Nellie became alarmed.  The clergyman also looked
perplexed.

"Something must have happened," said the farmer-uncle, apologetically.

Watches were consulted and compared.

At that moment a heavy rapid tread was heard outside.  Another moment,
and Bob Massey sprang into the church, panting, flushed, dirty, wet,
wild, and, withal, grandly savage.

"Nellie!" he exclaimed, stopping short, with a joyful gaze of
admiration, for he had never seen her so like an angel before.

"Bob!" she cried in alarm, for she had never before seen him so like a
reprobate.

"Young man," began the clergyman, sternly, but he got no further; for,
without paying any attention to him whatever, Bob strode forward and
seized Nellie's hands.

"I dursen't kiss ye, Nell, for I'm all wet; but I hadn't one moment to
change.  Bin out all night i' the lifeboat an' saved over thirty souls.
The Brentley boat's done as much.  I'm ashamed, sir," he added, turning
to the clergyman, "for comin' here like this; but I couldn't help it.  I
hope there's nothin' in Scriptur' agin' a man bein' spliced in wet
toggery?"

Whether the clergyman consulted his Cruden's Concordance with a view to
clear up that theological question, we have never been able to
ascertain; but it is abundantly clear that he did not allow the
coxswain's condition to interfere with the ceremony, for in the _Greyton
Journal_, of next day, there appeared a paragraph to the following
effect:

  "The marriage of Robert Massey, the heroic coxswain of our lifeboat,
  (which, with all its peculiar attendant circumstances, and the gallant
  rescue that preceded it, will be found in another part of this day's
  issue), was followed up in the afternoon by a feast, and what we may
  style a jollification, which will live long in the memory of our
  fisher-folk.

  "Several circumstances combined to render this wedding-feast unique.
  To say nothing of the singular beauty of the bride, who is well known
  as one of the most thrifty and modest girls in the town, and the
  stalwart appearance of our coxswain, who, although so young, has
  already helped to save hundreds of human lives from the raging sea,
  the gathering was graced by the presence of the bridegroom's
  bed-ridden mother.  Old Mrs Massey had been carried in, bed and all,
  to the scene of festivity; and it is due to the invalid to state that,
  despite rheumatics and the singularity of her position, she seemed to
  enjoy herself exceedingly.  Besides this, the friends and comrades of
  the coxswain--backed by the enthusiastic groomsman, Joe Slag--would
  not permit Massey to don wedding garments, but insisted on his dancing
  himself dry, in the rough garb in which he had effected the rescue.
  This he had no difficulty in doing, having already run himself more
  than half dry in hastening from the lifeboat to the church, which
  latter he reached only just in time.

  "The little girl whom Massey personally saved was also present, with
  her mother and grandfather; and one interesting episode of the evening
  was the presentation to our coxswain of a gold watch and a purse of
  fifty sovereigns by the grateful old grandfather.  Another peculiarity
  of the proceedings was that Massey insisted--although the clergyman
  was present--on his old mother asking God's blessing on the feast
  before it began.  All who are acquainted with our liberal-minded vicar
  will easily understand that he highly approved of the arrangement.

  "To crown all, the feast was conducted on strictly teetotal
  principles.  We have frequently advocated the principles of total
  abstinence in these columns--at least for the young, the healthy, and
  the strong--and we are glad to acknowledge that this wedding has
  greatly helped our cause; for the fun and hilarity in all, the vigour
  of limb in dancing, and of lung in singing--in short, the general
  jollity--could not have been surpassed if the guests had been swilling
  rivers of beer and brandy, instead of oceans of tea.  Yes, as one of
  the Irish guests remarked, `It was a great occasion intoirely,' and it
  will be long before the event is forgotten, for the noble deeds of our
  Greyton lifeboat are, from this day forward, intimately and
  inseparably connected with her coxswain's wedding!"

Thus spake the Greyton oracle; but, prophet though that journal
professed to be, the oracle failed to discern that from that time
forward the names of Robert Massey and Joe Slag would very soon cease to
be connected with the Greyton lifeboat.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 3.

Soon after the wedding recorded in the last chapter an event occurred
which entirely altered the character and current of our coxswain's
career, at least for a time.  This was the sudden death of the
bed-ridden old mother, who had played such an interesting part at the
wedding-feast.

To our hero, who was a tender-hearted man, and a most affectionate son,
the blow was almost overwhelming, although long expected.

"I don't think I can stay here much longer," he said one evening to his
pretty wife, as they sat together outside their door and watched the
village children romping on the sands; "everything minds me o' the dear
old woman, an' takes the heart out me.  If it wasn't for you, Nell, I'd
have been off to the other side o' the world long before now, but I find
it hard to think o' takin' you away from all your old friends and
playmates--and your Aunt Betty."

A peculiar smile lit up Nellie's face as her husband concluded.

"I should be sorry to leave the old friends here," she replied, "but
don't let that hinder you if ye want to go away.  I'd leave everything
to please you, Bob.  And as to Aunt Betty--well, I'm not ungrateful, I
hope, but--but _she_ wouldn't break her heart at partin' wi' _me_."

"Right you are, Nell, as you always was, and always will be," said
Massey.  He laughed a short, dry laugh, and was grave again.

It was quite evident that Aunt Betty would not be a hindrance to the
departure of either of them and no wonder, for Betty had received Nellie
Carr into her family with a bad grace when her widowed brother, "old
Carr," died, leaving his only child without a home.  From that day Betty
had brought the poor little orphan up--or, rather, had scolded and
banged her up--until Bob Massey relieved her of the charge.  To do Aunt
Betty justice, she scolded and banged up her own children in the same
way; but for these--her own young ones--she entertained and expressed a
species of affection which mankind shares in common with cats, while for
Nellie Carr she had no such affection, and contrived to make the fact
abundantly plain.  As we not infrequently find in such circumstances,
the favoured children--which numbered seven--became heart-breakers,
while the snubbed one turned out the flower of the flock.

"Then you're sure you won't think it hard, Nell, if I ask you to leave
home and friends and go wi' me over the sea?"

"Yes, Bob, I'm quite sure.  I'm willin' to follow you to the end o' the
world, or further if that's possible!"

"Then the thing's settled," said Massey, with decision, rising and
thrusting his short pipe into his vest pocket, the lining of which had
already been twice renewed in consequence of the inroads of that
half-extinguished implement.

In pursuance of his "settled" purpose, our coxswain proceeded to the
lifeboat-shed in search of his bowman, Joe Slag, and found him there.

"Joe," said he, in the quiet tone that was habitual to him, "Nell and I
have made up our minds to go to Australia."

"To Austrailly!" exclaimed Slag, leaning his arms on the mop with which
he had been washing down the lifeboat.

"Ay; I can't settle to work nohow since the dear old woman went away;
so, as Nell is agreeable, and there's nothin' to keep me here, I've
decided to up anchor and bear away for the southern seas."

The bowman had seated himself on a cask while his friend was speaking,
and gazed at him with a bewildered air.

"Are 'ee in arnest, Bob?"

"Ay, Joe, in dead earnest."

"An' you say that you've nothin' to keep you here!  What's this?" said
Slag, laying his strong hand tenderly on the blue side of the boat.

"Well, I'll be sorry to leave _her_, of course, an all my friends in
Greyton, but friends will get along well enough without me, an' as for
the boat, she'll never want a good coxswain while Joe Slag's alive an'
well."

"You're wrong there, mate," returned the bowman, quickly, while a look
of decision overspread his bluff countenance, "there'll be both a noo
cox'n and a noo bowman wanted for her before long, for as sure as the
first goes away the tother follers."

"Nonsense, Joe; you're jokin' now."

"Yes, I'm jokin' if _you're_ jokin'; otherwise, I'm in dead arnest too--
in as dead arnest as yourself, if not deader.  Wasn't you an' me born on
the same day, Bob?  Didn't our mothers crow over us cheek by jowl when
we was babbies?  Haven't we rollicked together on the shore ever since
we was the height of our daddies' boots, an' gone fishin' in company,
fair weather an' foul, to the present hour, to say nothin' o' the times
we've lent a hand to rescue men an' women an' child'n i' the lifeboat?
No, no, Bob Massey! if you lay yer course for Austrailly, Joseph Slag
follers, as sure as a gun."

Finding that his comrade was in downright earnest, and possessed of a
will as inflexible as his own, Bob made no effort to dissuade him from
his purpose.  On the contrary, he approved of the determination, for he
was pleased at the unexpected demonstration of affection which his
announcement had called forth in one who was by nature undemonstrative,
and who, having thus given vent to his aroused feelings, quickly resumed
the reserve from which he had been so suddenly drawn out.  Massey,
therefore, shook hands with him, by way of sealing an unspoken compact
of eternal friendship, and suggested that they should proceed together
to the office of an emigration agent, who had recently made his
appearance in the village.

In the office they found a very small boy, with an air of
self-possession that would have been suitable in his grandfather.

"Is the agent in?" asked the coxswain.

"Yes, but engaged.  Sit down; he'll attend to you directly."

The lifeboat men obeyed, almost sheepishly, the one speculating as to
whether highly developed precocity was not almost criminal, the other
wondering how such a boy would look and act if obliged to undergo the
process of being rescued--say by the hair of his head--from a wreck.

Their minds were diverted from this subject of contemplation by the
entrance of a man and woman.  These, like themselves, were told to sit
down and wait.  The man was long, thin, and lugubrious.  The woman
short, slight, and lackadaisical, though rather pretty.

Evidently the agent was a busy man, for he kept them waiting some time.
When he at length appeared he almost took the breath away from his
visitors, by the rapid and enthusiastic way in which he described the
advantages of the great island on the other side of the globe.  There
was gold--yes, _enormous_ quantities of gold in all directions.  There
was land of the finest quality to be had for next to nothing; work for
all who were blessed with good bone and muscle; a constant demand for
labour--skilled or unskilled--at high wages; a climate such as the
Olympian gods might revel in, and--in short, if all England had heard
the oration delivered by that man, and had believed it, the country
would, in less than a month, have been depopulated of its younger men
and women, and left to the tender mercies of the old and middle-aged.

Our two fishermen were captivated.  So were the lugubrious man and his
mild little wife.  The end of it was that, three weeks later, these
four, with many other men and women of all ranks and conditions, found
themselves on board the good ship _Lapwing_, ploughing their way through
the billows of the broad Atlantic Ocean bound for the sunny isles of the
Antipodes.

Wheels within wheels--worlds within worlds--seems to be the order of
nature everywhere.  The next day, D. Benigno told her friend with
a lot of mystery: - It is necessary to send home this subdiácono.

  It is a Carlist spy .... Barástolis! John is as good as
  Pedro, and between coats of desalmados and basements of these
Culebrillas do not know what to choose. said than done.

Avisose schoolboy's family, and clothing lay east of the abandoned
house, but there were no danger of leaving the church in costume.
Despidiose chuscamente to _kalendas carolinas_, which replied with
nonsense hero latini-speakers, was also reached some macaroni. After
seeing a single day and spent another Arreciado to the epidemic,
horrific murders that were committed to science and patience of the
authorities, the Universe seemed descuajaba, the machine's physical
and social world was made pieces, and that Never, ever would be next
to its rightful owner and consort. Bitter sadness took hold of her, not
thinking he will come one who is not death or mourning.

Thought to leave Madrid, running the venture in search of a husband and
the law that God gave him, but Cordero was removed from his head this
bold idea, so unbecoming of a reasonable person. During three days the
hero was not concerned that most of the collection of data to write
a report on the bloody events of 16 days, and was looking for references
to question witnesses, drank in the same sources of historical
truth, sought details, phrases, a thousand accidents, and those
little things that usually get much juice the diligent Clio.

Scrutinizing such shocking events, which saw the horrors of the
Imperial College and St. Thomas had exceeded those of San Francisco el
Grande, where he died navajazos to fifty individuals. In the Merced
Calzada was great havoc. Of San Francisco gave the lengthy news dwindled
Rufete, who was on duty that day and bought some unenviable reputation
for having given assurances to the General Order that nothing would
happen at home, and shortly after having allowed the free passage of the
heinous murderers. Rufete distorted the facts to ensure their cowardice,
perhaps, or maybe no more than cowardice, complicity was infamous
murderers. The stated oficialete have saved the lives of many
Franciscans, but who managed to escape alive from the infamous day ensured
that when the conflict was not an official by Mr anywhere. There
were ample reasons to assert that Mr. Rufete had to hide in the
basement of the building, giving no signs of life until, half dead and
community, was very fierce, and throwing suits against Venables
_pillería_. All these data, news and Cordero was the collecting
versions of the same heroes of tragedy, then put each in its proper
place. It is obvious that the exalted Rufete he chose for himself
in the harshest disgorging is namely the culvert. Skipping all the demands
of history Cordero good, if you miss what was said of the poisoning
of water and the party had faith in this brutal and then the blessed
_tierra San Ignacio_ ill. This ingredient has played in those
terrible events a leading role.

It was hideous weapon of bad faith, ignorance and absurd pretext, and
not because of one of the most ugly political crimes that were committed
in Spain. We know the victim and the rude instrument. Hand, what
hand he was and where? ¿Believe in the spontaneous error in the mob and
an instinctive movement of the blind and barbaric ... Is difficult
to believe this. But the sting of concern to the rough, making biting
and cocear was hidden in the mystery. Was the matter resolved and
disgorging ordered dark circles, and scandal-hungry evil? It is also
difficult to ensure this, which by its enormity resists human reason.
Fate cause you to obscure the facts and false light in which light can
not be presented here claiming your page, the page you are entitled
to the perplexity of the narrator and the conventional history is
welcome .... stepmother that fate, which so kindly given to adopting
a child abandoned, usually ugly and sickly, who rejected the same
logic that spawned it in the darkness.

Rumors ran that kind Alelí father had perished in the fierce 16 . This
fortunately did not prove true. Hallábase the elderly in nursing
from her convent, and completely disrupted and without trial, when the
murders occurred. Nothing was reported. Lamb accompanied by a good time
every day until his death, which was so quiet and smooth, almost unnoticed.
A nap longer than the usual hiding when his passage, which occurred
in late July.

Nazario died of cholera on the next day of the massacre. Tables inherited
his bad, but by that gift of immunity which, according to an old
saying, a weed, the animal won the Asian epidemic, or perhaps this
asustose him, leaving him free, but very well recommended to a
cancer It took on its own some years later.

For Romualda, who are almost up one morning to kiss the steep stairs of
a house in the street of Ruda, we learned that Lopez had
resigned his short misfortune. Romualda both increased and, therefore,
that a night in detention at the eightieth step. I was prostrate and
kissed the stairs.

Both went without thinking that had come to heaven. Lopez went to the
hospital. Who died can not doubt, by its nature incurable evil, but
nobody knows when or how miserable life that became extinct, and
no news of his place of burial.

Ended in mystery, if not entirely alone will accompany the pain and
consciousness, the only company that fit.-It was XXX-Saturday. It had
been six days since he never quite appalling July 16, and Sola,
hopeless and without peace, unable to find consolation in his own thoughts,
summoned friends to the family council.

Crucita felt that he should not think that anyone in devilish man
came, the older boys were offered to leave and walk across the
peninsula to find, and D. Benigno suggested they were all to
where you Cigarrales aguardarían more peaceful, free from the fear that
seized the minds of all in the Court and Villa. Sola resisted going to
Cigarrales while having no news of her husband or not seeing enter
safely.

That day he spent in solitude and sighs, looking at land and sky, with
questioning eyes, not daring to orally sad thought. But if the soul
was troubled by the lady, he was not the least of the famous Arc hero
blessed because while gaining ground in the idea that she does not
ever seem _marido your mujer_, was treacherously seizing of the same an
expansive sense of his spirit, I do not know which one, something
akin to the joy ....

The poor man, whose honesty, still subject to further evidence,
it was always big and strong, suffered a lot with this drawing
_caricia of Demonio_ with the temptation of sin, or is severe.

But as he could in the will, overcame all of his chest showed that
shingles is stealthily crept into the, or invoking God first and
then Genevese exclaimed with rapture strong Christian and philosopher:
"Far be it from me This infamous for the disappearance of the
happiness that won me.

If God would kill her to inherit and pass this, congratulations,
but I be damned if I want his death, and before I see it eaten by
worms envious.

Well said that great thinker in the book V of _Emilio_, _The under which
only relies on the shares is under false postiza_. "At night, retired to
his home full of grief, not power and ease with words and fictions that
of his unhappy friend.

Juanito lying to James, who had refused to secede from it and slept
next to her room, ordered the servants who slept well, and was alone
in her bedroom praying until late in the evening.

Durmiose finally in his bed, and believe in dreams feel unusual noise
in the street and at home. It was a nightmare. Parecíale that the
house was sinking, or that she was in an army or a giant made the
pieces with his heavy foot. Despertose shock. The heart beats while
the much livelier was about to happen inertia and therefore the
cardiac syncope.

But the well-recognized and awakens to see that the noise continued,
was incorporated in the bed, put attention ....

Steps were heard in the house ... touched gently on the door of his bedroom
... a voice rang .... Sola instinctively jumped from his bed 25. She
began to dress in a hurry ....

Failed to wear .... - .... me - Wait ... a moment .... Expects me to
view .... And half dress and ran to the door opened for her husband.
- But I see you leaving ...-- told embrace.

The servant came to light, a point he let go coat and hat. When D.

Benigno found the next morning, she was stunned and absorbed in the
middle of the aisle know that _marido of señora_ was unharmed in Madrid
and at home. The hero gave a great sigh.

After looking at the sky, launched a pious apostrophe and said: -
Barástolis!

For one and triune God, the Virgen del Sagrario, for Rousseau, honored
by my life and my awareness of Christian rejuro and swear that I
am happy with all your soul.

When Salvador came out of his bedroom, close abrazáronse both ladies and
be sworn faithful friends as they have left to live.

Many acquaintances visited the newcomer, and that day he had occasion
to do a charity, rather, to approve and sanction, since it was made
conditional on his wife. Single free bohardilla gave the house to the
ladies of Porreño in rancid nobility who was not part of the dike
intrusive misery. Fernando VII died, the modest pension faltoles what
gave them this. His dignity did not allow them to implore the charity.
His meaning, the various skills of Doña Maria de la Paz they could
aspire to hold, even worse, his honest work.

Only helped them in trances so distressing, giving them the house
and caregivers do not know how much work linen. The gratitude of the
two unfortunate ladies was dignified respect remarkable.

Mrs. Salome fell from peak white to thank the generous landlord. Presentose
wrapped in ajadísimos tafetanes, adorned with feathers and fur rotten
powdery.

With all the subtlety of his character and dignity, with all the courtesy
of their education and all the stiffness of his embalmed body expressed
his feelings, saying that if the favor was more liberal at a time when
dire woe! they had disappeared completely by the Knights. Cigarrales
the departed.

There trascurrían sweet and slow times.

The quiet was complete, the weather delightful, admirable health,
in concert with the sweetest peace and joy of souls. Salvador and D.
Benigno talk politics, each according to its criteria, experience and
diverse knowledge, the second slope, to the general, the theories, the
more first clung to the facts, and deducing from the incompatibility
of these with the idea, sobering consequences ; Cordero left carrying
the optimism and great confidence in the enthusiasm, the men of
virtue and the strength of certain ideas; Salvador inclined to
pessimism, revealing very chastened by the experience, just believe
in people and less on green ideas and regret.

D. Clement believed that all Spaniards should embrace the flag of freedom,
respect and always exalted Religion and the Throne: accept all the
advances of the century, and applied to the laws, customs, living and
thinking, preventing wars and collisions. He added that all Spaniards
do not like going down this road, the rebels must be convinced to
sticks, which should be free to arm forming an organized militia,
no less than the famous July 22, rival the Spartans in the famous Arc de
Boteros. Salvador not disapproved these ideas, but little faith in
the good intentions of those who thought their friend, too little faith
in the militia, the militia and sticks in the ideal harmony between
freedom and the Church. Declaring all his thinking said he did not
expect to see in a lifetime rather than deviations, errors, sterile
struggles, trials, attempts, jumps back and forth, corruptions
of the new systems that increase of the former, by the lofty ideas bastard
bad faith, and progress is almost always won their fight with
ignorance. - The best days - he said pointing with his cane the
horizon - are still so far out that surely neither you nor I will
see.

Reform is slow, because the evil is serious and deep, and has only
been working to heal itself. I live away from politics. I am
overwhelmed by experiences I've seen a lot, I turned my mission. There
are a thousand roads open where they can launch the new men. Those who
are not, she should stay at the side watching and experiencing. My
ideal is far away. The time you have saved as yet, he was not anywhere
in sight here. But come, and although we did not see that reality,
worthy of admiration, from here we take the thought to enter into a
dark future, and contemplate the wonderful news from Spain for our
grandchildren.

Meanwhile, I have enthusiastically as you, because I do not believe in
this. I think I go to a bad comedy.

Nor applaud or whistle. Callus, and perhaps I sleep on my eyeglasses.
I have no happiness in my dream house, which is a positive fact,
that dream of the distant future of our homeland, this time, my
dear friend, that most Spaniards laugh angelic innocence of the
policy to you.

-XXXI-Stop. Here the narrator concludes its work, having played
quite sure imperfectly, but it has been completed on time (go by
what the other one) and continued when he was due to the imperfections
and errors of Work will become unforgivable.

The years following the 34 are too close, we touch, rub, we are familiar
with us. The men are confused about them with our men. Years who are can
not be dissected, because they live in something that hurts and
jumps to be performed with scalpel.

Stay, then, here this long work on last page (which I beg to serve as
the Gospel) I swear not to abuse the kindness of the public, adding
to the ten thousand pages that contains the _Episodios Nacionales_.
Here we conclude this definitively. If any well-intentioned does not
think so and want to continue, historical facts and curiosities
and social policies in large numbers at its disposal.

But the novelistic characters, who have been living in this dilatadísima
day, I keep as my own self-ownership, and kept for contemporary forms
of caste, as the reader will not abandon me to leave me forever, and
with complete resolution called _género HISTORY_. END OF THE NOVEL AND
THE NATIONAL EPISODES Santander .-- November-December 1879. Prólogo In
brief form at the top of this issue left me saying he had prepared a
long letter on the origin and intent of this work, historical elements
before, and the data collected and anecdotes, including some further
relief _sobre novel contemporánea_ Spanish.

I soon regretted this precipitate offer, and I was silly for a big part
in the trials which refers to general and critical views on the
literary genre most cultivated in Spain. And the dust in the waste paper
which was the worst written and ill thought _Ensayo_, stir me angry
against myself for the naughty morning to offer what in any way I
can now fulfill.

I go back resolutely pick my word, and then spontaneously there was
nothing childish oath, nor a case of moral conduct, I hope to look
good with my readers and my conscience.

And if you rush me, I prefer to go through just to get into formal and
wisdom honduras criticism, investigating the hidden laws of
beauty that moves the time and fashion them printed, and sniffing
the roads and this continued for another or discredit his glory. To
fulfill the promise that I would be leaving the ranks of the procession
and I make it ring. There are those writers who perform admirably
this double work, and walk in the procession and chiming being peeled.
They have the wonderful gift of art and practice of legislating
on it, and are masters in everything falls under the jurisdiction
of the pen.

God would know that anything that gave me something of themselves, even
if not but to succeed on this occasion, but can not be like this,
I resigned, and the commitment is limited to part only of what
offered, ie that no longer have an obligation to talk a little about
how and when these pages were written. I know what I am, is not science
but the experience belongs to the easy erudition and depth of one's
actions, and will come as a silk, without fear of adverse opinions or
descontentadizos that they have more or less approximate to the truth
as it is the same certainty. In early 1873, the year of great
upheavals, was written and published the first of these novels,
as being undecided on the plan, development and extension of my
work, which even had set the titles of the novels that compose the
series were announced and promised with more enthusiasm than thought.

But the pleasure with which the public received _The Court and Carlos
IV_ sirviome light or inspiration, suggesting, with the complete
episodes NATIONAL, the link of the ten obritas making up the
distribution and scale of the issues, so that the whole unit would be
possible in the extreme variety that this kind of storytelling
requires.

Four novels appeared regularly on time each year in Almanac, and in the
Spring of 1875 was completed with Arapiles_ _The Battle of the first
series.

Many readers had (within the limited number of Spanish readers), I
thought it appropriate to undertake a second series. Indeed, the painting
of the war remain incomplete, and incomplete descabalada as if he
was not put on the table a couple of changes and trapisondas that
the campaign continued.

The wrath of the warriors of 1808 had only moved in and so, because
still in the field of consciousness and ideas. This second war,
perhaps most ardent but less bright than the previous one, pareciome good
subject for another ten stories devoted to politics, political parties
and the struggles between tradition and freedom, the first soldier,
veteran, rookie second soldier But as both frenetic and fierce, that
even in our days, and if both are to old, there is no rush in their
symptoms of fatigue.

With more and some factious _Un friars menos_ NATIONAL episodes were
completed, and notwithstanding the excitation of some fans to these
readings, it seemed wise to leave my job at that point because the length
would have impaired its low value, and because past year 34, the events
are too recent to have the spell of history and not so close that they
can carry in it the elements of truth in the contemporary. Embrace
therefore episodes NATIONAL twenty-nine years, which, fixed, it gave more
events and produced more males, and in a word, made more history than
the entire preceding century.

If we value the illusion of time, we can say that those years were
twenty-nine eighteenth century, the true paternity of this
civilization, or combination of progress and remnants of vices and
qualities that we know by that name.

For more than the present generation price of living almost exclusively
from their own ideas, the truth is that there is no advancement
in our time who has not had his trial more or less happy, or error
which is not readily available at little grain that is dig into
history to find her.

All the nonsense that we have done it before now greater. And if now
seems missing in the large impulses that once certain facts
immortal, it is because there are no circumstances that encourage, if
occurred, would those impulses. And if not, you really try. It is and
always will be a great pleasure for the whole generation to look in the
mirror that immediately preceded it.

This, in the first place, and circumstance, happy for me, not to exist
in the contemporary novels of Spanish literature in recent history, has
depended the success of these books and the estimation of those whose
literature would not have ever met. This work was started before they
were fashionable trends in literature, at least here, but even if
it had been written a little later they would be born clean of any
intention other than the nice way of presenting the essential facts
military politicians and most dramatic period of the century, in
order to recreate (and also teach, but not much) to the fans to
this kind of readings.

Even remotely occurred to me recently mortify and even to those people
of a country at odds with ours those tragic days. Dementia patriotic
_chauvinisme_ call our neighbors is so contrary to my way of
feeling, which I got for free from the disease now and forever.

Slogan here with this statement in response, late yes, but it categorically
written a famous magazine circulation Universal discreet and marred by a
26 French publicist, while favoring my work with flattering
assessments indicated that the author of it intended to gather the spirits
of his countrymen against France.

That one or more novels appear painted the feelings of the Spaniards with
the vehemence of 1808 requires the historic property can not be
inferred that these feel antipathy toward a nation which now bind
us all stronger alliances policies.

The proximity between the two countries is so great to get tired
of the mutual trade and easy communication is so incontrovertible
that the influence we exert on the ideas, customs, industry and
even the wealth of our neighbors, but here there _chauvinisme_ The facts
so suddenly cured.

In addition, the French themselves, in their patriotic literature,
have never been so scrupulous nor bars have stopped bothering with
in terms of more or less justice to nations that have had some
altercation with them.

Two other foreign writers, while addressing the same subject slightly,
have followed the approach of Mr. Louis-Lande. They also address these
comments. What we commonly call _Historia_, ie bulky books that these are
just marriages of kings and princes, of treaties and alliances, in
campaigns on land and water, leaving everything in oblivion else that
constitutes the existence of peoples, not enough to base these
relationships, or they are nothing, or are living, feeling and to
breathe on people.

Data was forced to ask the forgotten annals of the customs and even the
costumes, all that which can not uphold the tradition of the
revolutions of fashion, and that is lost in the swell of time,
leaving very low in trace files State.

It was essential also request help from the personal and anecdotal
literature, including reports and correspondence collections.

But these treasures of our libraries are very poor. Few have mentioned
that the sets of true life. There is in our nature a modest background
that detracts from the formation of the real story, and also
suffer from a lack of sincerity. What they call _vida pública_ is
represented by a tedious comedy conspiracy of all, friends and enemies.

It was obvious that Ian suffered, for an expression of weariness and
pain sat on his emaciated countenance, but on the appearance of Hayward
the expression gave place to a glad smile on a face which was naturally
refined and intellectual.

"Oh, thank you--thanks--" said Ian, in a low hesitating voice, for he
was almost too far gone to speak.

"There, don't speak, dear boy," said the doctor, gently.  "I see you
have been thinking about our last conversation.  Shall I read to you?"

"No--no.  Jesus is speaking--to me.  His words are crowding on me.  No
need for--reading when He speaks; `Come--unto Me--I will _never_--
leave--'"

His breath suddenly failed him, and he ceased to speak, but the glad
look in his large eyes showed that the flow of Divine words, though
inaudible, had not ceased.

"Mother--father," he said, after a short pause, "don't cry.  You'll soon
join me.  Don't let them cry, Dr Hayward.  The parting won't be for
long."

The Doctor made no reply, for at that moment the unmistakable signs of
dissolution began to overspread the pinched features, and in a few
minutes it became known throughout the ship that the "King of Terrors"
had been there in the guise of an Angel of Light to pluck a little
flower and transplant it into the garden of God.

Hayward tried to impress this fact on the bereaved parents, but they
would not be comforted.

They were a lowly couple, who could not see far in advance of them, even
in regard to things terrestrial.  The last words of their child seemed
to have more weight than the comfort offered by the doctor.

"Cheer up, David," said the poor wife, grasping her husband's hand, and
striving to check her sobs, "Ian said truth, it won't be long afore we
jine him, the dear, dear boy."

But even as she uttered the words of cheer her own heart failed her, and
she again gave way to uncontrollable grief, while her husband, dazed and
motionless, sat gazing at the face of the dead.

The funeral and its surroundings was as sad as the death.  Everything
was done to shroud the terrible reality.  The poor remains were tenderly
laid in a black deal coffin and carried to the port side of the ship by
kind and loving hands.  A young Wesleyan minister, who had been an
unfailing comforter and help to the family all through the boy's
illness, gave a brief but very impressive address to those who stood
around, and offered up an earnest prayer; but nothing could blind the
mourners, especially the parents, to the harsh fact that the remains
were about to be consigned to a never resting grave, and that they were
going through the form rather than the reality of burial, while, as if
to emphasise this fact, the back fin of a great shark was seen to cut
the calm water not far astern.  It followed the ship until the hollow
plunge was heard, and the weighted coffin sank into the unknown depths
of the sea.

An impression that never faded quite away was made that day on some of
the more thoughtful and sensitive natures in the ship.  And who can say
that even amongst the thoughtless and the depraved no effect was
produced!  God's power is not usually exerted in visibly effective
processes.  Seeds of life may have been sown by that death, which shall
grow and flourish in eternity.  Certain it is that some of the reckless
were solemnised for a time, and that the young Wesleyan was held in
higher esteem throughout the ship from that day forward.

Some of the passengers, however, seemed very soon to forget all about
the death, and relapsed into their usual frames of mind.  Among these
was Ned Jarring.  For several days after the funeral he kept sober, and
it was observed that the Wesleyan minister tried to get into
conversation with him several times, but he resisted the good man's
efforts, and, when one of his chums laughingly remarked that he, "seemed
to be hand and glove wi' the parson now," Black Ned swung angrily round,
took to drinking again, and, as is usually the case in such
circumstances, became worse than before.

Thus the little world of ship-board went on from day to day, gradually
settling down into little coteries as like-minded men and women began to
find each other out.  Gradually, also, the various qualities of the
people began to be recognised, and in a few weeks--as in the greater
world--each man and woman was more or less correctly gauged according to
worth.  The courageous and the timid, the sensible and the vain, the
weak and the strong, the self-sacrificing and the selfish, all fell
naturally into their appropriate positions, subject to the moderate
confusion resulting from favouritism, abused power, and other forms of
sin.  It was observable also that here, as elsewhere, all the coteries
commented with considerable freedom on each other, and that each coterie
esteemed itself unquestionably the best of the lot, although it might
not absolutely say so in words.  There was one exception, namely in the
case of the worst or lowest coterie, which, so far from claiming to be
the best, openly proclaimed itself the worst, gloried in its shame, and
said that, "it didn't care a button," or words, even more expressive, to
the same effect.

Ned Jarring belonged to this last class.  He was probably the worst
member of it.

One night an incident occurred which tested severely some of the
qualities of every one on board.  It was sometime after midnight when
the dead silence of the slumbering ship was broken by perhaps the most
appalling of all sounds at sea--the cry of "Fire!"

Smoke had been discovered somewhere near the fore-cabin.  Fortunately
the captain had just come up at the time to speak with the officer of
the watch on deck.  At the first cry he ran to the spot pointed out,
telling the officer to call all hands and rig the pumps, and especially
to keep order among the passengers.

The first man who leaped from profound slumber into wide-awake activity
was Dr Hayward.  Having just lain down to sleep on a locker, as he
expected to be called in the night to watch beside a friend who was ill,
he was already dressed, and would have been among the first at the scene
of the fire, but for an interruption.  At the moment he was bounding up
the companion-ladder, a young man of feeble character--who would have
been repudiated by the sex, had he been born a woman--sprang down the
same ladder in abject terror.  He went straight into the bosom of the
ascending doctor, and they both went with a crash to the bottom.

Although somewhat stunned, Hayward was able to jump up and again make
for the region of the fire, where he found most of the men and male
passengers working with hose and buckets in the midst of dire confusion.
Fortunately the seat of the conflagration was soon discovered; and,
owing much to the cool energy of the captain and officers, the fire was
put out.

It was about a week after this thrilling event that Mrs Massey was on
the forecastle talking with Peggy Mitford.  A smart breeze was blowing--
just enough to fill all the sails and carry the ship swiftly on her
course, without causing much of a sea.  The moon shone fitfully through
a mass of drifting clouds, mingling its pallid light with the wondrous
phosphoric sheen of the tropical seas.

Mrs Mitford had been regaling her companion with a long-winded and
irrelevant, though well-meant, yarn about things in general and nothing
in particular; and Nellie, who was the personification of considerate
patience, had seated herself on the starboard rail to listen to and
comment on her lucubrations.

"Yes, as I was sayin', Nellie," remarked Peggy, in her soft voice, after
a brief pause, during which a variety of weak little expressions crossed
her pretty face, "I never could abide the sea.  It always makes me sick,
an' when it doesn't make me sick, it makes me nervish.  Not that I'm
given to bein' nervish; an', if I was, it wouldn't matter much, for the
sea would take it out o' me, whether or not.  That's always the way--if
it's not one thing, it's sure to be another.  Don't you think so,
Nellie?  My John says 'e thinks so--though it isn't to be thought much
of what _'e_ says, dear man, for 'e's got a way of sayin' things when 'e
don't mean 'em--you understand?"

"Well, I don't quite understand," answered Mrs Massey, cutting in at
this point with a laugh, "but I'm quite sure it's better to say things
when you don't mean them, than to mean things when you don't say them!"

"Perhaps you're right, Nellie," rejoined Mrs Mitford, with a mild nod
of assent; "I've sometimes thought on these things when I've 'ad one o'
my sick 'eadaches, which prevents me from thinkin' altogether, almost;
an', bless you, you'd wonder what strange idears comes over me at such
times.  Did you ever try to think things with a sick 'eadache, Nellie?"

With a laugh, and a bright look, Mrs Massey replied that she had never
been in a position to try that curious experiment, never having had a
headache of any kind in her life.

While she was speaking, a broad-backed wave caused the ship to roll
rather heavily to starboard, and Mrs Massey, losing her balance, fell
into the sea.

Sedate and strong-minded though she was, Nellie could not help shrieking
as she went over; but the shriek given by Mrs Mitford was tenfold more
piercing.  It was of a nature that defies description.  Its effect was
to thrill the heart of every one who heard it.  But Peggy did more than
shriek.  Springing on the rail like an antelope, she would have plunged
overboard to the rescue of her friend, regardless of her own inability
to swim, and of everything else, had not a seaman, who chanced to be
listening to the conversation--caught her with a vice-like grip.

"Hold on, Peggy!" he cried.

But Peggy shrieked and struggled, thus preventing the poor fellow from
attempting a rescue, while shouts and cries of "man overboard" rang
through the ship from stem to stern, until it became known that it was a
woman.  Then the cries redoubled.  In the midst of the hubbub the strong
but calm voice of the captain was heard to give orders to lower a boat
and port the helm--"hard a-port."

But, alas! for poor Nellie that night if her life had depended on
shouters, strugglers, shriekers, or boatmen.

At the moment the accident happened two men chanced to be standing on
the starboard side of the ship--one on the quarter-deck, the other on
the forecastle.  Both men were ready of resource and prompt in action,
invaluable qualities anywhere, but especially at sea!  The instant the
cry arose each sprang to and cut adrift a life-buoy.  Each knew that the
person overboard might fail to see or catch a buoy in the comparative
darkness.  He on the forecastle, who chanced to see Nellie fall over, at
once followed her with the life-buoy in his arms.  Ignorant of this act
the man near the stern saw something struggling in the water as the ship
flew past.  Without an instant's hesitation he also plunged into the sea
with a life-buoy in his grasp.

The faint light failed to reveal who had thus boldly plunged to the
rescue, but the act had been observed both at bow and stern, and a cheer
of hope went up as the ship came up to the wind, topsails were backed,
and the boat was dropped into the water.

Twenty minutes elapsed before there was any sign of the boat returning,
during which time the ship's bell was rung continually.  It may be
better imagined than described the state of poor Bob Massey, who had
been asleep on a locker in the fore-cabin when the accident occurred,
and who had to be forcibly prevented, at first, from jumping into the
sea when he heard that it was Nellie who was overboard.

At last oars were heard in the distance.

"Stop that bell! boat ahoy!" shouted the captain.

"Ship aho-o-oy!" came faintly back on the breeze, while every voice was
hushed and ear strained to listen, "All right! all saved!"

A loud "Thank the Lord!" burst from our coxswain's heaving chest, and a
wild ringing cheer leaped upwards alike from passengers and crew, while
warm tears overflowed from many an eye that was more intimate with cold
spray, for a noble deed and a life saved have always the effect of
stirring the deepest enthusiasm of mankind.

A few minutes more and three dripping figures came up the gangway.
First came Nellie herself; dishevelled and pale, but strong and hearty
nevertheless, as might be expected of a fisher-girl and a lifeboat
coxswain's wife!  She naturally fell into, or was caught up by, her
husband's arms, and was carried off to the cabin.

Following her came two somewhat exhausted men.

The cheer that greeted them was not unmingled with surprise.

"The best an' the worst men i' the ship!" gasped Joe Slag, amid laughter
and hearty congratulations.

He was probably right, for it was the young Wesleyan minister and Ned
Jarring who had effected this gallant rescue.

The performance of a good action has undoubtedly a tendency to elevate,
as the perpetration of a bad one has to demoralise.

From that day forward Black Ned felt that he had acquired a certain
character which might be retained or lost.  Without absolutely saying
that he became a better man in consequence, we do assert that he became
more respectable to look at, and drank less!

Thus the voyage progressed until the good ship _Lapwing_ sailed in among
some of the innumerable islands of the Southern seas.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 6.

Darkness, whether physical, mental, or spiritual, is probably the
greatest evil that man has had to contend with since the fall.  At all
events, the physical and mental forms of it were the cause of the good
ship _Lapwing_ sailing one night straight to destruction.

It happened thus.  A pretty stiff breeze, amounting almost to half a
gale, was blowing on the night in question, and the emigrant ship was
running before it under close-reefed topsails.  For some days previously
the weather had been "dirty," and the captain had found it impossible to
obtain an observation, so that he was in the dark as to the exact part
of the ocean, in which he was sailing.

In an open sea this is not of serious moment, but when one is nearing
land, or in the neighbourhood of islands, it becomes cause for much
anxiety.  To make matters worse, the ship had been blown considerably
out of her course, and, worst of all, the night was so intensely dark
that it was not possible to see more than a few yards beyond the flying
jibboom.

The captain and mate, with several of the men, stood on the forecastle
peering anxiously out into the darkness.

"I don't like the look o' things at all," muttered the captain to the
chief mate.

"Perhaps it would be well, sir, to lay-to till daylight," suggested the
mate.

Whether the captain agreed with his chief officer or not was never
known, for just then a dull sound was heard which sent a thrill to the
bravest heart on board.

"Breakers ahead!" cried the look-out, as in duty bound, but he was
instantly contradicted by the mate, who shouted that they were on the
starboard beam, while another voice roared that they were on the
port-bow.

The helm was instantly put hard a-port, and immediately after the order
was given "hard a-starboard," for it was discovered that the sound of
breakers came from both sides of the vessel.  They were, obviously,
either running in a narrow strait between two islands, or into a bay.
In the first case the danger was imminent, in the second case,
destruction was almost inevitable.

"Clear the anchor, and stand by to let go!" cried the captain, in loud
sharp tones, for he felt that there was no room to turn and retreat.
The order was also given to take in all sail.

But before either order could be obeyed, a cry of terror burst from many
throats, for right in front of them there suddenly loomed out of the
darkness an object like a great black cloud, which rose high above and
seemed about to fall upon them.  There was no mistaking its nature,
however, for by that time the roar of the breakers right ahead told but
too plainly that they were rushing straight upon a high perpendicular
cliff.  At this moment the vessel struck a rock.  It was only a slight
touch at the stern, nevertheless it tore the rudder away, so that the
intention of the captain to put about and take his chance of striking on
the rocks to starboard was frustrated.

"Let go," he shouted, in this extremity.

Quick as lightning the anchor went to the bottom but with such way on
the ship, the sudden strain snapped the chain, and the _Lapwing_ rushed
upon her doom, while cries of terror and despair arose from the
passengers, who had by that time crowded on deck.

To the surprise of the captain, and those who were capable of
intelligent observation, the ship did not immediately strike again, but
sailed straight on as if right against the towering cliffs.  Still
onward it went, and as it did so there settled around them a darkness so
profound that no one could see even an inch before his eyes.  Then at
last the ill-fated vessel struck, but not with her hull, as might have
been expected.  High up above them a terrific crash was heard.

"God help us," exclaimed the captain, "we've sailed straight into a
cave!"

That he was right soon became evident, for immediately after the
crashing of the topmasts against the roof of the cave, a shower of small
stones and several large fragments fell on the deck with a rattle like
that of musketry.  Some of the people were struck and injured, though
not seriously so, by the shower.

"Get down below, all of you!" cried the captain, himself taking shelter
under the companion hatchway.  But the order was needless, for the
danger was so obvious that every one sought the shelter of the cabins
without delay.

The situation was not only terrible but exceedingly singular, as well as
trying, for as long as stones came thundering down on the deck it would
have been sheer madness to have attempted to do anything aboveboard, and
to sit idle in the cabins with almost certain death staring them in the
face, was a severe test of endurance.

From the motion of the vessel several facts could be deduced.  Although
the scraping and crashing of the masts overhead told eloquently of
destruction going on in that direction, the heaving of the ship, and her
striking occasionally on either side, proved that there was deep water
below her.  That they were not progressing into an interminable cavern
was made evident by the frequent plunging of the shattered bowsprit
against the inner end of the cave.  This action sent the vessel reeling
backwards, as it were, every time she struck, besides shattering the
bowsprit.  That the cave, also, was open to the full force of the sea
was only too severely proved by the rush of the billows into it, and the
frequent and severe shocks to which they were in consequence subjected.
These shocks had extinguished the lamps, and it was only by the aid of a
few candles that they were delivered from sitting in absolute darkness.

In these awful circumstances the young Wesleyan proved that, besides the
courage that he had already shown in facing danger on a sudden
emergency, he also possessed that far higher courage which can face the
slow and apparently sure approach of death with equanimity and
self-possession.  Moreover, he proved that the Word of God and prayer
are the true resources of man in such extremities.

Calling those who were willing, around him, he led them in prayer, and
then quieted the timid among them, as well as comforted all, not by
reading, but by quoting appropriate passages from Scripture, in which he
was profoundly versed.

"D'ee know when it'll be low water, sir?" asked Joe Slag of the captain,
when the ship gave one of her upward heaves and rasped her timbers again
on the sides of the cave.

"Not for three hours yet, but it's falling.  I expect there will be less
sea on in a short time.  If the ship holds together we may yet be
saved."

There was a murmured "thank God" at these words.  Then Bob Massey
expressed some fear that there might be a danger of striking the rocks
underneath before low water.

"I wish it was the risin' tide," he said, and the words took his mind
back, like a flash of lightning, to the time when he used them in a very
different sense.  Then all was peace, hope, sunshine, and his bride was
sitting like a good angel beside him, with a sweet smile on her fair
face.  Now, something like darkness visible, showed him his poor wife--
still beside him, thank God--but clinging to his arm with looks of
terror amounting almost to despair.  "What a contrast!" he thought, and
for the first time a feeling of rebellion arose in his mind.

"There's no use o' sittin' here to be drowned like rats," he cried,
starting up.  "I'll go on deck an' take a cast o' the lead, an' see what
chances we have."

"No, you won't, Bob," cried Nellie, throwing her arms firmly round him.
"There's big stones falling all about the deck yet.  Don't you hear
them?"

As if to corroborate her words, a piece of rock nearly half a ton in
weight fell on the sky-light at that moment, crashed completely through
it, through the table below, and even sank into the cabin floor.
Fortunately, no one was hurt, though Slag had a narrow escape, but that
worthy was not easily intimidated.  Is enmity dating from the war with
the French. Both are stubborn, proud, and perhaps in their youth to
these events something that always are a source of rivalry between
men .... - .... Any woman -- Maybe, it might have been - that she
said calmly threw to indifference.

Anything else said about it, but we do not care yet, and still more
urgent to follow the footsteps of the person who referred the lady
and the priest , go after him without delay. Some days we saw him enter
the house of D. Felicísimo Butcher, who still had some outstanding
accounts. Agent gets about welcoming anyone who has become a very
lucrative business, and making him sit at his side dábale pat on the
shoulder and even ventured to tell any of the tasty thing Carlist
conspiracy. One morning, upon entering Butcher's home, found the
ladder to an army colonel friend. D. was Thomas Zumalacárregui. He
was accompanied by the Count de Negri, and this made him realize
that the brave Biscayan, hitherto resistant to the blandishments
of prudish people, had seduced the left end.

It went ahead and waved. Abriola door tables. Upon entering hit the cat,
who escaped mayando, then, because of the dark corridors of the
ramshackle, encountered Doña María del Sagrario, who dropped to
the clash of the hands of a dish enormísimo Puche.

He screamed at the sky the lady, and therefore noise alarmose D. Felicísimo
who ventured out of their niche, asking if the house had become a jumble
of _cristinos_. Deshacía Salvador in excuses, and when approaching the
wall, manchósele black clothes so that it looked like a miller.

To shake, not without comment with some rudimentary phrases that
money from the walls, had to face one of the beams supporting the
house and found that all the fragile plant shuddered and fell from
the ceiling pieces of plaster, as if between ran to the woods above
step load warlike armies of mice.

Finally came to shake hands with Butcher and came together in the office.
- It seems that enters a storm in my house - said the old man placed in
its niche -. What?

Have you found the ladder to Zumalacárregui and count? Good soldier and
a good diplomat, hee ... - Zumalacárregui is a good acquisition -
answered Salvador -. Have courage and talent. - Well, there are
still other acquisitions much better - Butcher said rubbing his hands
-. How unfortunate that this Government of Mr. Zea has undertaken the
voluntary disarmament of the realistic ... Yes, fantasmón of Leon in
Castroterreño and goofy Llauder of Catalonia put offices in the
government saying they have removed their weapons to the volunteers
realistic. Do you think? Do you think you can remove the sun rays? Hee.
And believe that the Bobillo has a pike in Flanders! ... I call
this man a _bobillo_ Zea, which is a sort of minister embalmed, as the
King has become a King of papelón. - The government is strong cree, Mr.
Butcher, and seems determined to throw a slab on from D.

Carlos. Very careful, my friend, who now seem to throw to. - Oh! I do not
fear anything - said D. Felicísimo emphatically, echándose back -. But
what we're going to urge.

I know what's coming to you today. - I came to the same thing yesterday.
- And the day before yesterday and Tuesday and Saturday. Today you have
not been in vain. At last, at last .... - Did - Yes, Mr. D.

Carlos Navarro, our brave friend, arrived night before his tour of the
kingdom of Navarre and Alava and Vizcaya. It is a beautiful subject.
Said that anyone religious country until the stones have the heart
to beat by D.

Carlos, to miss the hands to pick pumpkins rifles. The bells there,
sounding the church when they say 'no more freemasons "and the date on
which the war the men of the land will be able to conquer Europe while
women conquer the rest of Spain ....

Well, very good .... Do you want to see this man? We warn you that is
hidden. - No matter: I only talk about family matters. In the last summer
was on the farm but I could not see, because he always refused to receive
me. Now I will be easier because you will write two words. - I will be
happy, but to warn you that Mr Charles is sick of the liver. You've
already seen so much work! Is a tireless champion of good teachings.
Last night he complained of dreadful pains, and in rare religious man
as hee, over the demons that invoked the Blessed Virgin. If you want
to be sure that you want the interview, I shall say the father Gracian,
a Jesuit, an excellent person who comes here some evenings, and then we
go to take a chocolate Maroto's house, where he is the Father Faces
.... Well, Thanksgiving is a friend of Mr. D. Carlos, and it has
long been proposed to reconcile with his wife .... Oh! Neblí for a good
father that reconciliations Gracián. - I know. It is a worthy
priest who has the best intentions in the world, and if not happy
to make all humanity is not because God wants ....

In conclusion, you sort it out and Father Gracian for me to see Mr. Navarro
and talk about an issue that is political and not just him and me
to us.

He lives ... - I do not know if I should tell you at this time, before
the same Mr. D. Carlos, beautiful person, hee ... before the same Mr.
Carlos Navarro to leave for you to see.

I settle myself. Turn your house this morning.

After that was Salvador, D. Felicísimo wrote a letter on which, after
drawing three crosses, he: _A Lady Doña Maria de la Paz Porreño, street
Belén_.-III-The poor ladies were almost in the same narrowness in 1822,
because the removal policies respectful social and stopped at the door
of that house, which was undoubtedly one of the best museums of fossils
that then existed in Spain. The time at prevailing absolutism were thrives
for the house and plenty of pantries Porreñanas same as those that
prevailed in the vilest of the rabble _clubs_. So in terms of comfort the
dying and victuals Marquis would have ended with a disaster like the
empires that have been formidable if not come to their rescue an industry
that, while it is rather prosaic, there is something noble to be
related to the hospitality .

As the two unfortunate ladies room famous in his home as a respectable
gentleman so rich during the season, sometimes very long, that the
subject spent in Madrid. The treatment was excellent, good pay, and
harmony between the host and the ladies so perfect that all three
brothers appeared. Familiarity enhanced by respect and a dignified
simplicity reigned in the silent house that seemed inhabited by
shadows. Well that is for historians to know that with the modest
pecuniary advantage gained by one half honestísimo ladies had
renewed the mueblaje although all the old parts were kept, held by
the patches and polished by time and the toilet.

¡Cosa admirable!

the reló 2 had returned to walking, but by the malice or watch a
mystery mechanical impossible to penetrate, walked back, and after
twelve gave eleven, then ten and so on.

Table of Saints of the Order Dominica had been restored by the Dona Paz,
a wise old geezer assisted carpenter, bookbinder and sexton, and
plaster here, pegote there with half a dozen black brushstrokes in the
shadows and a good hand Car varnish over the whole surface, as had
been the day it came into the world. For the same style had been saved
from complete ruin of the holy urns and cornucopias, who have not
already, but its crystal azogue irregular spots appeared a collection
of maps.

What is new, it was very humble, was straw chairs, curtains percale, mat
color wheels, but was glad the house and its ancient matalotaje.
For image so that the corpses of past centuries was laughing in his
grave. At the time that we find it again, Doña María de la Paz was
close to a rapidly aging apoplectic, marching in with gouty feet,
head temblona, shoulders and neck gross. His hair, however, blacks were
kept the same as the moon, and she was chasing the gray as though they
were liberal and did not give any quarter, is as ruthless with
them, when they came in droves and could not be launched by afraid
to stay in the pure hull, dressed in mourning dress that no one knew.

So when this was not done with skill (with the forces that had undermined
the view) showing the temples and forehead clouded with some black
clouds above which shone an admirable mimic snow of the winter landscape.
Doña María Salomé was so mummified who appeared to have been sent from
Egypt in those days and that the newly unpacked to expose the
curiosity of lovers of ethnography.

Fixed at a low silleta, which had become part of his person, was
responsible in arranging Chervil to decorate, and his side were in
various wicker basket, apolilladas feathers, ribbons dull shades,
cloths of silk and wrinkled, discolored as the leaves of autumn,
all pervaded by a smell of perfume mixed tomb of camphor.

They said bad language to get the clothes together the pieces and sewed
them into the body, also said they ate for camphor kept and which it
was, covered in kidskin. These are malicious Boberías that historians
should not do serious case. One morning .... Forgot to say that the
house had a great piece that gave an interior courtyard or Corralón very
spacious, which receives the sun all day. In this piece Doña Paz tended
the laundry at home. From wall to wall it was all strings, they were
full of clothes that looked like a forest of wet rags.

Well, one morning walked Doña María de la Paz for those of poplar toilet,
when Doña María Salomé, and giving him a letter just to bring home,
he said: - Another letter to Mr. D. Carlos. Comes with about yourself,
but it is for him. Look at the three crossings. The letter appears
Mr Felicísimo. - It is when we wake up - replied Doña Paz -. Mr. Poor
has gone very bad night. - By the way - said Mrs.

Salome with very serious face, which showed a scrupulous apprehension -
of course I do not know if it will be useful to receive letters
like this.

This can lead to interpretations contrary to our honor and good name.

The neighbors get to know everything ... see that we received letters
... they come here at night that many men ....

I do not know, I do not know ... - Shut up, woman - said Dona Paz hovering
between the head by white branches -. What we suspect may - may fall any
blemish, woman on our reputation - said in a very bad mood Salome -.
Well you know that it is not enough to be honest, but similar, and
two ladies alone, like us, have to take great care not to walk in
languages malicious. - Always a fool!

- Muttered Doña María de la Paz disappearing in as the forest of thick
clothing. - I am determined to speak clearly to Mr. D. Carlos - added
another -. Nobody appreciates more than me, but that men come and go
at all hours of day and night is not consistent with what has
always been our home.

What do you want? I can not get used, I am well. I say and I repeat, I
will speak to Mr Carlos. - No more missing but marear Mr Carlos with such
impertinence - Doña Paz said in a mall reappearing canvas. - I say
and I repeat ....

In addition, companions, assistants or whatever you are Mr Carlos,
we are the considerations that we deserve. What more ... Yesterday I
had not finished when combed in barbarous Zugarramurdi that came into
my room without asking permission ....

And for what? to tell me if I had seen one of his spurs that he could
not find. - Bobadas .... Speak lower .... I think that has attracted
Mr. Navarro. Appeared in the door to a huge beard, which was pasted a
man.

Among those enormous brown fleece dry and left a voice that said
desabrida: - Chocolate. - Then Mr.

Zagarramurdi. Take this letter that you have brought to Mr. D.
Carlos. What is today? - Mal - replied by giving half of their beards
and disappearing back where he came. - What modes! - Salome whispered to
his room please -.

Since there is no gentleman. Navarro lived in the same room occupied
some years earlier by a woman who died in the odor of sanctity.

Little or no change had taken the piece, which appeared more than cabinet
chapel, or rather an abbreviated transcript of the court in heaven,
because everything in it was painted and Santic package, relics,
shrines and monasteries prints, embroidered hearts, palm hearts,
and an altar complete with tin candlesticks, chandeliers hanging
from the ceiling, their missals and three plasters chasubles cardboard
paper, in an attitude of holding Mass sung.

Completed the decoration of a huge sword to be the same nail that Hold
a baby Jesus in canvas embroidery, two shotguns leaning into a corner,
two gloves and two masks fencing together with two pairs of florets,
three suitcases and a man widely used. This man hallábase submerged
or rather sitting in an armchair with his legs hidden under the
thick blanket that came to the waist, her head leaning on his chest
and immobile so it seemed asleep or dead.

A brazier cisco showed well past his pile of ash glazed fire near the
wrapper that it should contain the individual's feet, which if
ever there were signs of them were cold.

His face was dark green pulling due to pallor, and the whites of the
eyes was not white but yellow. The black hair was quite gray and rough,
and usually was the powerful head resting on a black hand, toasted,
with veins and muscles and tendons, twisted the hand that was
reminiscent D.

Quixote Maritornes taught when he was hung from the skylight of the sale.
In a pedestal near the guerrilla was taking medication cards that
read, snuff, a book, a rosary and a gun.

Drinking and smoking: alternating with readings, it was his occupation
in the pioneering days of the boring hours of the nights of insomnia.
Not fond of the friends he would talk. His best friend was the most
discreet of all, silence. Oricain But Zugarramurdi and were distracting
to use, although for a short time. Pulling the foil, and then the
eyes of the guerrilla is encouraged; carefully followed the movements of
the lip and even threw some duelists word spicy or comments among master
rechinantes steels. But suddenly said 'enough' and the two athletes
hold the foil and masks aside, bringing to light the face sweaty. At
that time Zagarramurdi seemed prehistoric man sausage in his ferocious
beards, and Oricain the formidable Bears navarro, lost much beauty,
because the wire mask concealing his ugliness.

That day (that means the days of the letter D. Felicísimo ) D. Carlos
became tired more quickly than ever. - Enough stock - he said
-. Zugarramurdi, Pop down a gift of Thomas Zumalacárregui home and
tell you tomorrow I hope. Oricain, alcánzame my rosary and vote. When
the father Gracián go and if I sleep, I wake up ....

Today we do not like. After siesta time came Father Gracian. Mocetón was
a high stature, thirty or forty-eight years old, brown, thick lips,
nose aberenjenada, rough skin, and tanning, as explicitly by God
to resist the blistering tropical climates and polar ice .

His beard was so black and thick that even shave the same day leaving a
dark stain across the bottom of the face. Herculean forces that should
be arrogant grenadier of the Church, and if the point of view is
admirably constituted body for the missions, he was not in the least
spiritual, being a man of great wisdom, eruditísimo in sacred
letters, and quite strong in the profane, eloquent in the pulpit
and persuasive in conversation, eagle and lynx in the chair in the
confessional.

Also known in medicine and had passed through that miraculous cures. Grandón
was so that his dip seemed a piece of cloth, they are not smooth
conclusion never to put cloth in the wind.

His hat tile no less than half a stick, and as always had a little
thrown back and his body is hunched forward, it seemed that was
carrying a heavy beam.

Their exaggerated feet buried in cloth shoes, stepped to the
heaviness and the strong adhesion of plant espadrille roadway, striking
a sledgehammer tiles docks and warehouses. After greetings with the
affability chosen guerrilla sick, took a seat next to him, and putting
his hand on some openings in the cloth behind which had pockets as deep
as the sea began to get more paper cones similar in size and shape
to that in the stores to hold two quarts of sugar, coffee or aniseed.

As the going got put on the pedestal and looked rotulillo that his
handwriting was written on each one. - What is it? - Navarro chopped
curiosity asked, suspecting that his friend had grocery store or
drugstore. - This is the land route from San Ignacio in Manresa, a
relic that people ask very devout.

Today I received a small shipment, and distribute among friends who
have the time I have asked ....

If you have forgotten the cornet de Doña María de la Paz .... Oh!
no, here it is. Will you do me the favor of handing them. These others
are for the Honorable Countess of Rumble to the nuns of Góngora,
for Mr D.

Peter King, who has had to kill their precious little girl Perfectita,
and several other families ....
It turned out that the "end" of the cliffs which the doctor had only
supposed possible, was a reality, for, after a long gaze, Slag turned
and said--

"Your eyes are better than you think, sir, for the end o' the cliff is
visible, an' a spit o' sand beyond is quite plain."

As this report was corroborated by Bob Massey, and then by all the other
men, it sent a thrill of gratitude into the hearts of most of the
party--especially the women, who, having lain so long wet and almost
motionless, were nearly benumbed in spite of the sunshine.  Longer
exposure, indeed, would probably have proved fatal to poor Mrs Mitford,
possibly also to Mrs Hayward, who was by no means robust.  As for our
coxswain's wife, having been reared among the health-giving breezes of
the sea-shore, and inured from infancy to exposure and hard work, she
suffered much less than her female companions, and busied herself a
great part of the time in chafing their cold limbs.  In doing this she
reaped the natural advantage of being herself both warmed and
invigorated.  Thus virtue not only "is," but inevitably brings, its own
reward!  Similarly, vice produced its natural consequences in the case
of Black Ned, for that selfish man, being lazy, shirked work a good
deal.  It is possible to pull an oar in such a way that, though the
rower may be apparently doing his best, he is, in reality, taking the
work very lightly and doing next to nothing.  Acting in this way, Ned
Jarring became cold when the sleet and spray were driving in his face,
his blood flowed sluggishly in his veins, and his sufferings were,
consequently, much more severe than those of his comrades.  Towards the
afternoon of that day, they rounded the spit of sand mentioned by Joe
Slag, and came upon a low-lying coast.  After proceeding a considerable
distance along which, they discovered a good harbour.  This was
fortunate, for grey clouds had again covered the sun and a bitter east
wind began to blow.

"Thank God, Eva," said Hayward, as he steered into the bay, "for if we
had not come upon this harbour, your strength and that of poor Peggy, I
fear, would have failed, but now you'll be all right in a short time."

"Oh, no, sir, I don't think as _my_ strength would fail," said Peggy, in
a feeble voice, for she had overheard the remark.  "Not that I shouldn't
be thankful all the same, I allow--for thankfulness for mercies received
is a dooty, an' most on us do fail in that, though I say it that
shouldn't, but my strength ain't quite gone yet--"

"Stand by, Slag, to fend off with your oar when we get close in," said
the doctor, interrupting Peggy's discourse.

"Have any of you got matches in your pockets?" asked Massey, clapping
his hands suddenly to the various receptacles about his person, with a
look of unwonted anxiety.

"Ye may well ax that, Bob," said O'Connor, using his own hands in the
same way.  "Cold, wet weather, and no house!  It 'ud be death to the
women, sure, av--"

"Here you are!" shouted Tomlin in a burst of triumph, in spite of his
naturally reserved disposition.

He held up a box of vestas which, being a smoker, he fortunately had in
his pocket.

"I hope they ain't wet," remarked Black Ned, suggestively.

"Wrap 'em well up," said Slag.

Tomlin drew out his handkerchief and proceeded to do so.  At the same
moment the boat's keel grated softly on the shingly shore.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 8.

Seldom have the mysterious sparks of life been sought for more
anxiously, or tended and nursed with greater care, than were the little
sparks of fire which were evoked with difficulty from Tomlin's
match-box.

Drizzling rain had commenced just as the wrecked party landed.  The
tarpaulin had been set up as a slight, though very imperfect, shelter;
the ground underneath had been strewn with twigs and grass, and a large
pile of dead branches had been arranged to receive the vital spark
before any attempt was made to create it.

"Everything must be quite ready, first," said Hayward to Tomlin, "for
our very lives depend, under God, on our securing fire; so keep the
matches snug in your pocket till I ask for them."

"I will," replied Tomlin, "D'you know it never occurred to me before how
tremendously important the element of fire is?  But how will you ever
manage to make the branches catch, everything being so thoroughly
soaked?"

"You shall see.  I have had to make a fire in worse circumstances than
the present," returned Hayward, "though I admit they are bad enough.
Have you got the small twigs broken and ready, Slag?"

"All ready, sir."

"Now look here, Tomlin."

As he spoke, the doctor picked up a dead but wet branch, and, sheltering
himself under the tarpaulin, began to whittle it with his penknife.  He
found, of course, that the interior of the branch was dry.  The thin
morsels which he sliced off were handed to Slag, who placed them with
great care in the heart of a bundle of very small twigs resembling a
crow's nest.  A place had been reserved for this bundle or nest, in the
heart of the large pile of branches lying on the ground.  Meanwhile,
Slag held the nest ready in his hands.

"Now, Tomlin, get out your matches," said the doctor.

With the utmost care the anxious man unfolded the kerchief, and, opening
the box, looked into it earnestly.

"Wet?" asked Hayward.

Tomlin shook his head.  "I fear they are."  He took one out, while the
whole party assembled round him to note the result.

The first match dropped its head like a piece of soft putty when scraped
on the lid.  The second did the same, and a suppressed groan escaped
from the little group, for it could be seen that there were not more
than ten or twelve matches in the box altogether.  Again and again a
match was struck with similar result.  The fifth, however, crackled a
little, and rekindled, sinking hope in the observers, though it failed
to kindle itself.  The seventh burst at once into a bright blaze and
almost drew forth a cheer, which, however, was checked when a puff of
wind blew out the new-born flame.

"Och! let Bob Massey try it!" cried O'Connor.  "Sure he's used to
workin' in throublesome weather."

"Right, boy," said Slag, "hand it to the coxs'n."

Tomlin readily obeyed, only too glad to get some of the failure shifted
to other shoulders.

Massey readily undertook the task, and success attended his first
effort.

"I knowed it!" said Nellie, in a quiet tone, as she saw the bright flame
leap up and almost set her husband's beard on fire.  "Bob never fails!"

The burning match was quickly plunged into Hayward's handful of
shavings, which blazed up as he thrust it into Slag's nest; and Slag,
holding the nest with the tender care of a loving sick-nurse, and the
cool indifference of a salamander, till it was a flaming ball, crammed
it into the heart of the pile of sticks.  Tremendous was the volume of
smoke that arose from the pile, and anxious were the looks riveted on
it.

"Sure ye've smothered it intirely," gasped O'Connor.

"Oh, me!" sighed Peggy in a voice of mild despair.

"No fear, it's all right," said Massey, in a confident tone, while Joe
Slag, on his knees, with cheeks inflated and nose all but kindling, blew
at the glowing heart with unwearied determination, regardless alike of
friend and foe.

"It's going to do," remarked John Mitford in his most dismal tone.

"Any child might tell that," said Nellie, with a light laugh.

The laugh seemed infectious, for the whole party joined in as a glorious
gush of flame rushed among the sticks, dried up the dampness, and
effectually changed the pillar of smoke into a pillar of fire.

The fire thus kindled was rightly deemed of such vital importance that
it was not permitted to go out thereafter for many months, being watched
night and day by members of the party appointed to the duty by turns.
It had, indeed, not a few narrow escapes, and more than once succeeded
in reaching what appeared to be its last spark, but was always caught in
time and recovered, and thus was kept burning, until a discovery was
made which rendered such constant attendance and care unnecessary.

"Now," said Dr Hayward, when the fire was safely established, "we have
not much daylight left, so it behoves us to make the most of it.  You
are a man of action and experience, Robert Massey, what would you advise
us to do first?"

"Well, doctor, since you're good enough to ask me, I would advise that
we should appoint a leader.  You see, mates," he continued, addressing
himself to the company in general, "there's no possibility of a ship
gettin' along without a captain, or an army without a general.  If we
was going off to a wreck now, with or without a lifeboat, I would claim
a sort o' right to be coxswain in virtue o' past experience; but, as
we've now begun a sort o' shore-goin' business, which requires a deal o'
general knowledge, besides seamanship, an' as Dr Hayward has got that
by edication, I move that we make him our leader."

"Right you are, Bob," said Joe Slag.  ("As he always is," said Nellie,
_sotto voce_.) "So I second the move--if that's the reg'lar way to do
it."

"Hear, hear!" said every one with right good will, and a gleam of pride
flashed from Eva's pretty brown eyes as her husband was thus unanimously
appointed leader of the shipwrecked band.

Like a sensible man, knowing his capacity, he at once accepted the
command without any display of undue modesty, and proved his fitness by
at once going to work.

"The first thing, then, is to thank God for our deliverance, which we
all do, I am sure, most heartily."

This was received with a responsive "Amen" from every one--not even
excepting Black Ned.

"Next, we must find fresh water and boil a bit of pork--"

"Ah, then, we haven't a kittle!" exclaimed O'Connor.

"Haven't we a big baling-dish, Terrence?" said Hayward.

"Sure we have, sor, an' it's a tin wan as'll stand fire," returned
Terrence with a reproved look.

"Well, then, you go fetch it; wash it well out, and get the pork ready.
Jarring and Tomlin will gather as much dead wood as they can find and
pile it beside the fire.  Mitford will search for fresh water--there
must be a spring or brook not far off--and Massey and I will rig up some
sort of shelter for the night."

"Please, sir, may I go with Mitford to seek for water?" asked Nellie.

"By all means, if you wish to."

"And I will keep you company, Nell," said Mrs Hayward energetically.

"So will I," chimed in little Mrs Mitford, feebly.  "I was always fond
of water.  As a child I used to paddle about in it continually, an'
sometimes tumbled into it, for of course young people will--"

"No, Peggy, you must sit by the fire with my wife," said the doctor.
"Neither of you is fit for work of any kind yet, so sit down and warm
yourselves."

Eva was too wise, and Peggy too weak, to offer objection, so these two
sat by the fire while the others went to work.

Energy of action tends to lighten the burdens that may be laid on human
spirits, and to induce the most favourable view of the worst
circumstances.  The toil which the party now undertook was such a
blessed relief to them after the prolonged exposure to cold and
comparative inaction in the boat, that all returned to the camp-fire in
a much more cheerful state of mind than they left it.  The searchers for
water came back first, having found what they sought close at hand; and
Terrence, filling his baling-dish, soon had the pork boiling, along with
some mysterious herbs gathered by the doctor to convert the liquid into
soup.  Tomlin and Black Ned returned heavily laden with firewood, and
Bob Massey discovered a tree with branches sufficiently spreading and
leafy to protect them to some extent from rain.

"'Tis as well we have found overhead protection, Massey," said the
doctor, when our coxswain led him to the spot, "for I have been thinking
that as we have no blankets, we shall be obliged to use our tarpaulin as
a quilt rather than an umbrella."

"That's true, sir," returned Massey, "but how about the women?"

"Well, I've been thinking about that," said Hayward, "and I've devised a
plan for to-night at least; to-morrow I hope to hit on a better
arrangement.  First of all, we'll spread in front of a fire, which we
will kindle beneath this tree, a layer of branches and grass.  In the
middle of this the women will lie down side by side, after having dried
and warmed themselves thoroughly at the fire.  Then we'll take two of
the floor planks from the boat, and put one on each side of them--
partially frame them, as it were.  Then one half of us men will lie down
on one side of the frame, the other half on the other side, and we'll
draw the tarpaulin over us all."

"Hm! not very comfortable," said Massey, "for the poor women to be
framed like that."

"Admitted; but what else can we do?" said Hayward.  "It would risk our
lives to sleep without covering of any kind in such cold weather, and
with sleet falling as it does now.  Better have the sheet spread upon us
than merely over our heads.  So now let's kindle another fire, and do
you arrange our couch, Bob."

In spite of the cold and the sleet, things looked much more cosy than
persons unacquainted with "roughing it" could believe possible, and they
became comparatively happy when the couch was spread, and they were
seated under the sheltering tree, with the fire blazing and crackling in
front of them, suffusing their faces and persons and the leaf-canopy
overhead with a deep red glare, that contrasted well with the
ebony-black surroundings, while a rich odour of pork soup exhaled from
the baling-dish.

"Ah! now there's nothin' wantin' to produce parfit felicity but a pipe,"
said O'Connor with a sigh.

"That's so, lad," assented Tomlin, echoing the sigh, and feeling in his
pocket from force of habit, though he knew too well that nothing was to
be found there.

"Here, Terrence," said Massey, handing him an empty pipe, at the same
time asking him to shut his eyes and draw, and try to imagine himself
smoking, but Terrence shook his head.

"I couldn't do that, Bob," he said, "but I'll sing ye a stave in praise
o' the weed."

Without waiting for permission, the jovial Irishman at once began:

  "Oh! it's 'baccy as is my chief joy,
  At mornin', noon and night;
  An' it's verily my belief, boy,
  That I love it with all my might.
  If your liver an' lungs are squeakin',
  An' your head is growin' cracky,
  There's nothin' so sure to kill or cure,
  As fumes o' the strongest 'baccy."

"If it would improve your voice, Terrence," observed Mr Mitford,
meekly, "I'm sure I wish ye had pounds of it, for it's that harsh--
though, of course, I make no pretence to music myself, but--"

"Just listen to that now, `Harsh!' an' that to a man whose own mother,
by the father's side, towld him he shud make music his purfession!
Arrah, howld on, Black Ned, ye spalpeen; ye've had two helpin's
already!"

This latter remark had reference to the baling-dish of soup which was
being passed round the party, so that each might help himself to two
mouthfuls of soup before passing it on.  As they had no spoons, the
doctor had extemporised ladles of folded bark, which served the purpose
pretty well.

"Haven't ye a small bit o' 'baccy in the corner o' wan o' yer pockets,
doctor, dear?" asked Terrence, insinuatingly.  "May be ye'd find a
morsel if ye'd try."

"Quite useless to try, my poor fellow," returned the doctor, with a look
of affected pity, "for I'm a non-smoker.  I never indulge in such an
absurdity."

"Sure, it's a true proverb that says `doctor's differ,'" retorted
O'Connor, "for most o' the saw-bones of my acquaintance have smoked like
lime kilns."

"More's the pity, Terrence, but if you'll heave on some more firewood
you'll have a smoke that may do as a substitute at present."

By heaping quantities of fresh branches on the fire till it was large
enough to roast an ox, the party managed to pass the night in
comparative comfort, in spite of cold and sleet.  Hayward watched the
fire during the first part of the night.  Then he was relieved by our
coxswain, who was succeeded by Joe Slag, and no Vestal virgins ever
tended their fire with more anxious solicitude than those three men
guarded theirs during that first night on the island.

As if to make up for the sufferings of the past few days, the morning
that followed broke with unclouded splendour, and the rising sun shone
upon as beautiful a scene as could well be imagined, for it revealed an
island richly clothed with verdure, which, rising out of a calm blue
sea, sloped gradually upwards, until its western ridge met the bright
sky.  Evidently that terminating ridge was the place whence descended
the precipitous cliffs, along which they had sailed immediately after
leaving the cave of the wreck.

There is no accounting for the eccentricities of weak-minded females,
whether pretty or plain.  The first thing that pretty little Mrs
Mitford exclaimed on opening her eyes and beholding the glorious view
was--

"Oh!  I _do_ so wish that we had oysters for breakfast!"

If she had expressed a desire for elephant chops, she could not have
taken Eva Hayward more by surprise.  As for Nell Massey, she went off
into a hilarious giggle.

"I fear there are no oysters hereabouts," said Hayward, "but I shouldn't
wonder if we were to find mussels and things of that sort.  Come, lads,
we'll go and have a search for them, while the ladies fill and boil our
kettle."

Limpets, mussels, and other shell-fish were found in great abundance.
With these warm soup was soon made, and after a hearty breakfast,
Hayward organised the party in two bands which were sent off in
different directions to explore the island, Peggy and her husband being
left behind to cook the dinner and keep up the fire.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 9.

For several days the shipwrecked party continued to live chiefly on
limpets and mussels gathered on the sea-shore.  Only a very little of
the pork was used, for the purpose of converting the food into soup.  As
they could not tell, of course, how long they might be compelled to live
there, it behoved them to be very careful of the food-supply already in
possession.  Fortunately, the weather continued fine, though cold, so
that it was not necessary at first to make any alteration in their camp
arrangements.

During this period much of their time was necessarily spent in laying in
a stock of shell-fish, and in attempting to bring down with stones some
of the gulls which flew inquisitively about and very temptingly near to
the camp, but none of the party was a good marksman with stone
ammunition, and it soon became evident that unless some other means of
obtaining food were discovered there was every prospect of starvation
ending their career.

In this emergency Dr Hayward organised an exploring expedition on a
more extended scale.  He divided the party into three bands--one
consisting of Ned Jarring, Tomlin, and himself, to examine the shores;
another comprising Joe Slag, John Mitford, and O'Connor, to penetrate
the interior and higher lands; while it was appointed to Bob Massey, who
had by that time come to be more frequently addressed by his old title
of "coxswain," to stay at the camp, keep the all-important fire going,
and guard the women.

"You see, we must go about this business thoroughly," said the doctor,
when they were all assembled in the camp one day after their frugal
meal, excepting O'Connor, who was a short distance off, trying, with
unwearied perseverance and unvaried failure, to kill gulls with stones.
"And for this purpose, we must hold a council of war.  Where's
Terrence?"

"He's pelting the gulls as usual," said Black Ned.

"A-missin' of 'em, you mean," suggested Mitford.

"Hallo, Terrence!" shouted Hayward, catching sight of the Irishman at
that moment.  "Here! we want you."

"Comin', sor, jist wan more shot at this baste.  He's bin flyin' round
me hid for half-an-hour at laste, winkin' at the stones as they go by
him.  Och! missed again--bad luck to ye!"

As he uttered the malediction the disappointed man heaved a last stone,
angrily and without an attempt at an aim.  He did not even look up to
observe the result, but turned sharply round towards the camp.

That stone, however, was like the arrow shot at a venture.  It hit the
bird full on the breast and brought it down, which fact was made known
to the sportsman by a cheer from the camp and a heavy thud behind him.

"Well done, Terrence!" cried Hayward as he came up with his prize.  "I
regard it as a good omen--a sort of turn in the tide which will
encourage us on our contemplated expedition."

The leader then gave minute instructions as to how long they were to be
away; how much food they were to take; the direction to be followed, and
the work to be done.

"In short," said the doctor in conclusion, "we must use our eyes, ears,
and limbs to the best advantage; but bear in mind that the grand object
of the expedition is--"

"Grub," suggested O'Connor.

"Just so.  Grub is our first and greatest necessity.  Meanwhile, Peggy,
Nell, and Eva will do what they can to make our camp comfortable: gather
mussels and other shell-fish and see that the coxswain does not eat more
than a fair share of victuals, and conducts himself in all respects like
an obedient and trusted servant."

With such and similar touches of pleasantry Hayward sought to cheer the
spirits of the party, and divert their minds from dwelling too much on
the fact that their case was a very serious one--almost desperate, for
they were on a comparatively small island, far to the southward of the
usual track of ships, without food or shelter, and without any of the
ordinary means of procuring either.

The remainder of that day was spent in making preparation for the
projected expedition.  As they had no offensive or defensive arms,
except two gully knives, their first business was to provide each man
with a spear.  Fortunately, some of the surrounding trees had very
straight branches of various sizes, so they had only to cut down such as
were suitable, and peel the bark off.  But the formation of hard points
gave them some anxiety, until Tomlin hit upon the idea of utilising the
bones of their pork.

"The very thing!" said Mitford, with a look of melancholy satisfaction.

Having no turn whatever for mechanics, he never saw difficulties till
they met and overcame him, and was always ready to rush in where
mechanical angels--if we may say so--feared to tread.

"And how would you propose to cut the bones, John?" asked Slag, with an
air of modest simplicity.

"Cut 'em? eh! well--wi' the knife, of course."

It was found, however, that the knife made but slight impression on the
bones, and after one or two vain attempts, they turned to a more
effective method.  Finding a huge boulder of some kind of sandstone they
broke it up, and on the rough surface thus produced, ground the bones
into sharp points, and by an ingenious method known to Slag, who learned
it from the Eskimos, they fixed these firmly on the ends of their
spears.

Thus armed, and with a small quantity of cold pork, and a large
allowance of cold boiled limpets and mussels in their wallets, they set
out on their explorations.

It is impossible to accompany two parties at once.  Let us follow just
now the one composed of Joe Slag, Terrence O'Connor, and John Mitford.
These, with Joe as their leader, proceeded along the shore some miles in
a northerly direction; and then, turning into the bush, which was
nowhere thick, they pushed into the interior of the island.  After
advancing about ten miles they came on a wide stretch of sandhills or
downs, and found that, having crossed a sort of isthmus, they had come
out again on the sea-shore.

"This won't do," said Slag, on making the discovery.  "We'll have to
steer d'rect for the highest land."

"That's so, Joe," said Mitford, "and yonder's a height away there, right
in the wind's eye, that will act as a beacon to us."

"I sees it, John--but, I say, what's the matter wi' Terrence?"

This question was drawn forth by the action of the Irishman, who had
walked on about fifty yards in advance of his comrades.  He was standing
in the attitude of an ancient Roman about to discharge a javelin.
Stooping low as if to render themselves less conspicuous, Mitford
muttered, "hallo!" and his comrade whispered, "Sh! he sees suthin'!"

Whatever it was he saw, O'Connor evidently felt too far off to act
effectively, for, after standing a moment in the classic position just
referred to, he suddenly lowered his spear, dropped on hands and knees,
and made a slow, undignified advance of a few yards.  Then he rose
again, became classic once more and discharged his spear, in a manner
that would have done credit to Achilles himself.

The growl that followed, and the "bad luck to ye," that came faintly
back on the breeze, told too plainly that the result was a miss.

"Sure it's a rabbit I saw," he said, returning to his companions, "an'
if I'd only sent it two yards more to the left, I'd have hit the baste!"

To the satisfaction of the explorers, it was found that the sandhills
were burrowed all over by rabbits, and that there existed there a large
colony of them.  Cheered by this--in spite of their bad javelin play--
they made for the high ground, and soon found themselves threading a
belt of wood, after crossing which they reached the foot of the range of
hills that bounded the island to the westward.

It was a weird, rugged spot, covered with great boulders that had rolled
down the hill-sides, and with gaps and chasms here and there of
considerable depth, that suggested the idea of volcanic action having
visited the place at some remote period.  These chasms or rents in the
earth were overgrown with trees or bushes in many places, and obliged
the travellers to make wide detours in some places to avoid them.

Thus they were so much delayed that night was upon them before they had
reached the higher parts of the hill-range where they had intended to
encamp.

The difference between blanketing and gossamer is great, yet it is
inconceivably slight compared with the difference between gossamer and
nothing!  In the pride of their strength the members of the exploring
party lay down to sleep without covering of any kind, for the good
reason that they possessed none, and before morning they would gladly
have given a fabulous price for even a gossamer coverlet.

"It's freezin' I am, if not froze," said Terrence O'Connor at the end of
the second sleepless hour.  "If we could have only brought away some o'
the fire in our pockets, what a comfort it would have bin!"

He got up, shook himself, and slapped his arms across his breast
vigorously.

Slag and Mitford followed his example.

"I'm beginnin' to feel better on the outside," continued O'Connor,
pausing, "but my spinal marrow isn't properly warm yet."

"'Minds me o' Baffin's Bay," growled Slag, with a mighty slap of the
arms between each word.

Mitford seemed to think any remark superfluous, for he only groaned.

"Pity it's too dark to see yer face, John," said Terrence.  "It must be
a sight worth seein'.  Och, av I only had a good-sized pocket-han'kicher
I'd wrap me feet in it, anyhow."

"Suppose we cut some grass and try that?" suggested Mitford.

The suggestion was acted on.

It was slow work cutting grass with a clasp-knife; tearing it up in
handfuls was still slower, but the labour warmed the tired explorers,
and when they lay down again under this Adam-an'-Eveic bedding, they
fell asleep almost immediately, and did not waken till the sun was
pretty well up in the eastern sky.

"Breakfast fust," said Slag, on completing a tremendous stretch and
yawn.  "It's always bin my way since I was a babby--business first;
pleasure to foller.  Grub is business, an' work is pleasure--leastwise,
it ought to be to any man who's rated `A.  One' on the ship's books.
Hallo! sorrowful-monkey-face, clap a stopper on yer nose an' tumble
up,--d'ye hear?"

Mitford did not hear, but a touch of Slag's toe caused him to feel and
to rise.

O'Connor was already astir, preparing breakfast.  Cold boiled mussels
and a bit of pork may be good food, but it is not appetising.
Consequently they did not linger long over the meal, but were soon
striding up the mountain-side rejoicing in the fresh air and sunshine.

There was a certain phase in John Mitford's character which had not yet
been discovered by his friends, and was known only to his wife.  He was
romantic--powerfully so.  To wander through unknown lands and be a
discoverer had been the dream of his youth.  He was naturally reticent,
and had never said so to any one but Peggy, who, being the reverse of
romantic, was somewhat awe-stricken by the discovery, and, in an
imbecile way, encouraged him to hope that, "one of these days he'd 'ave
'is desires gratified, as there was nothink to prevent 'im from goin' to
Novazealand--if that was the right way to pronounce it--or to Van Demons
land--not in a sinful way of course, for they had given up transportin'
people there now--though wherever they transported 'em to she couldn't
imagine--anyhow, there was nothink to prevent his tryin'."  And John did
try, which was the primary cause of his being a member of the exploring
party now under consideration.

Influenced by his romantic spirit, Mitford betrayed a troublesome
tendency to wander from his comrades in pursuit of the Unknown.
Okay, you arrastraré me. Can separate ever careful brother hated man? I
do not know. Let time pass, days pass. I have now occupied a very,
very serious.

This was the major occupations in Monsalud the effect of a stroke.
Quaked for the trial of his brother, who shortly before had expressed
clear and beautiful, and it suddenly got dark.

As a cloud passes in front of the sun, so that phrase went beyond
the discretion of the ill, hiding it. - Occupations serious, very
serious - Navarro said, rubbing their hands -.

For now I will tell you that if it is true what I have said, it you are
worthy of admiration. I do not deny it, and as to hold dear. I understand.
The affection is not something removable. Ya think that I have a certain
interest in you and that I would not like to see you unhappy. Be good,
and we'll see. The tone of protection, so unbecoming of the status of
both extremely shocked to Salvador, but their surprise and alarm when
Navarro got the point, after a while the palms of the hands on
the fire, was to his brother, and putting a face on the hands of those
that burned like iron, he said slowly: - Leave the end of this
great campaign, and then we'll see.

Salvador said nothing. Suspected that the head of his brother had a
monstrous idea, and did not want to pursue that idea, fearing to see the
sad suspicion confirmed. Letting it be cooked again hands, approached
the window to see the snowfall, which that day was enormous. It seemed
that the world navigate a deep infinity of swan feathers. Entered at the
time the father died of cold and Zorraquín sat astride a chair near
the fireplace, spread your feet to the fire. Shortly after the strong
heat of the flame and forced to depart. Began to darken, being at that
station evenings shorter than the hope of the poor, and Doña Hermenegildo
gave birth to a splendid Quinque, competitor's winter sun. Closed
timber, the four were prepared to go to the very long evening
breasts, which seemed a century, when it was not involved with
interesting and varied entertainment.

Doña Hermenegildo half was very lightly. That night needed winding
skeins of yarn, and had no winder, prestose, other times to fill
the blessed Father Zorraquín.

He was very kind man. The priest talk talk, and that the owner reel
reeling, it appeared that the lips that he was leaving the floor,
and the skein of his hands the thread, and that Mrs.

Hermenegildo was wrapped around the endless discourse, making it
a big ball , which could pass through large book. The priest spoke,
moving his arms and hands to swing slowly leave the thread, the situation
grew from a nut apple to apple pumpkin, and the two brothers heard, and
streets, one stationary, the other marking each turn of the skein with a
flick made with the tongs on the edge of the chimney. Each time
the wire is slipped, touching the toe of the right hand of the
priest, Navarro was a coup.

It was like the rhythm of a reló 17. Believe that the four individuals
were built to a jagged tangle speak, and the second ball. Salvador would
have to go through the humane reló shows that 18, because her
face did not express anything, unless the sadness of an immutable
timetable. Zorraquín What it?

Zumalacárregui the feats that the matter was bound in Pamplona and Navarre
throughout. Diffuseness good cure is not here to imitate, as he was being
proposed in the future historian of that great war, and aimed to gather
all news materials. Get all the same right as doubtful, and using
history as well as anecdotal, elements close to a huge warehouse
literary, fortunately, was killed in a fire years later. Zorraquín
related actions, describing places, reproducing the words, giving
speeches to the size and tone of discourse as Livy.

Until imitated the gestures of warriors, and when you reach a point where
there cheers of the crowd, as did the living, the need to beg the
voice down so as not to alarm the neighborhood.

In short everything possible bland narration, only that we had
encountered Zumalacárregui antagonism of unruly chiefs who rose
before him.

Hailed by some as the head of all the volunteers Navarre, found resistance
Iturralde. The cure Irañeta and Mongelos not hesitate to get their orders.
Dividiéronse the Carlino, but a small insurrection within the insurrection
born solved the big problem. The leader Sarasa rose one morning, and
making a prisoner Iturralde, proclaimed Zumalacárregui commanding
general of Navarre.

For this procedure, which was more than Navarrese Spanish pure unified
insurgency, and volunteers Carlists but no longer had a single head. This
drop from the first moment colossal energy. Reduced to a real soldering
of two volunteers who received real and began to fight with great fortune.
Ruled that those provisions celebrity extraordinary force Carlists
infused with weapons, and all showed remarkable guerrilla worthy
successor to the Viriato, Empecinado and Merinos, with more military
know that all of them. Its a terrible punishment revealed iron as needed
at that bloody occasion. Condemned to death in a side that was strictly
adhered to, all who turn their backs on the enemy during combat,
anyone who does not drive without hesitation appointed to the post
by his boss, even though it saw certain death, and all the voices
that spoke alarming as _que us cortan_, _que comes caballería_,
etc. .... all this without saying what Navarro heard nothing, and
cejijunto grim, until at last broke the word: - Enough of this talk,
Mr.

Zorraquín. If it has that type of writing, but not be mandated mine,
because I have no vanity in that. Hermenegildo Salvador and Queen
looked at ten in the evening when the two brothers were left alone after
dinner, Salvador Navarro pleaded that slept. - It is not bad - he
said this with great ease - because fatigue on fatigue, we reach
a point where no body will resist. I remain your advice, because it has
not been bad this time of day. Salvador accompanied him to his bedroom.
Navarro lay down and submerged in the bed with the sheets rebozo in
the mouth, without showing the person more than half its face and three
fingers of one hand, spoke to his brother this way: - Natural and
knew that it was Navarre in Spain and even across the resistance
found in Iturralde uprising Sarasa, and finally, the concentration
of all forces in this country under my command.

What is very strange because it is known, and even go to parliament and
written, the order of the day I gave in the Amezcoa, sending a
return shot to the back, to the subversive voices that speak out
and not go to positions of danger ....

This idea, that was long ago and I just put in execution, will be the
key to this great war and the basis on which to form the most feared
and warlike army, which have seen nations. Salvador could not
be contained. - No you - he said - who has done those things, but
Zumalacárregui.

He smiled contemptuously Navarro and as if his brother had said a
great foolishness, he replied thus: - But do not know, poor man, that
unhappy Zumalacárregui was taken prisoner in the Rioja region, led
to Estella, whose imprisonment was exacerbated his illness of the
liver and then transported in a car in Pamplona?

Do not you know who is in hospital with a serious evil, which some
have and others for hepatitis madness? Pity! Man! I appreciate you and
want to heal. He said, and turning the other side was lethargic. Asleep
shortly after.

After contemplating for a while, considering that was lost, Salvador
withdrew with the soul full of sadness. It took three days. Salvador
came one morning at his home and found Mrs. Hermenegildo shocked, tearful.
The good lady did not dare to give him the sad news of the incident
occurring during the absence of the master of the house.

Salvador understand thought, ran to the room of his brother, became
a stay to another .... It was not. - He ran away, yes sir, it does
not do half an hour away .... At one point I neglected .... I went
out to buy a few things ....

He stopped walking in the dining room with a cape and sword placed upwind.
Other times he was in the same packaging, do not suspect .... Still not
be out of town. Still it will stop .... What a disgrace! ... When
it seemed cured .... This morning I spoke with such wisdom! XXII ...
Without losing a moment investigations began. Some neighbors saw him
in the street, according to the direction and leading, he had to
leave by the door of the Rochapea.

Salvador asked the whole world, and as the poor patient was well known
in Pamplona, soon to hear about the direction we had taken. In the
company of Father Zorraquín, which was joined since learned of the
event, immediately walked around the suburb of Rochapea.

Initially the information received was vague and contradictory, but
at last he knew that Charles had bought a horse and had started to
escape in the direction of Villaba. The fact of being poor Navarro in
possession of his money was because of this leak, because if they had
found no gold horse, and could not walk very far. Salvador in the act
sought to buy two horses, one for himself and one for Zorraquín, who
offered to accompany him on the humanitarian enterprise that was to
undertake, but the cavalry was so scarce during the war, that all
night and the next day could not get anything useful.

Finally, after traveling all the suburbs and the outer blocks of the
city, managed to get two very high price cuartagos waste, veterans of
work trawling, whose 19 gave reverence and a desire to go on foot.

To be owner of those two pieces, Salvador was unable to laugh, but since
there were other improvements, was forced to take them, and decided
that before embarking on the first day was given a copious ration of
barley, to see if this remembered how his mocedad. Hartáronse so that
later was to give them equal ration of sticks to make them leave
the block and unusual gourmet that allowed the new owner.

At last those ramshackle machines were put into motion, leading to our two
riders on the path Villaba.

It was night and we left feeling hard frost. Salvador was on the road
and brought Zorraquín pergenio in a mixed passenger and ecclesiastic, no
robe, with black boots, coat and cure a black velvet cap, which borlón
danced to the hard beat of the cavalry. During the first hours of their
discussed the issue of her subject, discussing the chances of success.
Zorraquín believed that Navarro had not taken the path of Baztán
but the Amezcua, where at the time was engaged in war, what Salvador
objected that this is reasonable, should not be believed that the
fugitive had taken, because it seemed logical that this walk against
common sense.

However, the news took on the morning confirmed the suspicion of the good
priest. Before coming to Villaba dijéronles that the insane had receded
and returned to near Pamplona, after taking, apparently, the way
of Lecumberri.

Grupas again and the two riders headed to the Amezcua, without finding
any news in six days of molestísimo travel between shocks and setbacks.
Often they had to depart from the road trip with no guerrillas in the
hills that had bet on all traveler suspicious fire, and columns
Elizabethan inspired distrust both the chaplain, who do not pass
close to them for nothing in this world, fearing with suspected its
packaging rider cure.

The accommodations were hellish, but the advantage substituted with the
charity of villagers, aroused by Mr. Zorraquín. Some parts are treated
as a body of the king, as if they were relatives of the Infante, and the
cunning priest did not conceal their views and thus to be better
treated and cared for.

One day Zorraquín lost his black hat, no one knows how (but There are
various opinions on this incident, some arguing that it showed
what a cure muladar).

The owners of the house where the two friends were staying offered him
a white beret, also tassel, broad, round, with wooden hoop to hold the
plate. Púsosela priest historian Mirose the mirror, laughing echos, and
said it had not been removed more because he liked it or paint.

They departed, and admitted to the Carlist camp ran across the rugged
mountains without seeking to find the individual, not even evidence
that there had been no time in .

In all these investigations and went off the month of February and
March, and Salvador was very melancholy, Zorraquín happy and satisfied
to be among those people. One morning, returning to visit the village
where Carlists had its hospitals, the layer is entangled in a
thorny and was like two halves of Saint Martin.

Carlist officer offered him a point zamarreta Leather púsosela our
priest was found as well as agile, so comfortable with that pledge, to
shelter itself without impeding the movement, which was the
gustosísimo endorsed and promised to always bring thereafter.

As he grew a beard, and had refused to shave, no longer seemed such a
cure but a master criminal, guerrilla leader or something like that. He
laughed, laughed and was increasingly unhappy. With the certainty that
Navarro was not on the Amezcua, left for Levante.

But the fear of finding a column of army Saarsfield forced to take
precautions.

"Although they are unsuitable for me - said the priest - is not bad
with any weapon." A guerrilla who was accompanying them, because
friend or spiritual son of Zorraquín gave him a sword. How to wear
laughed good cure! ... Salvador gave him a belt with two pistols that
did not need.

When it became such harness the chaplain, who does not know the Church
nor her mother nor the mother who bore you, let such a great laugh, that
people came to see him on the road. El Salvador itself, which had witnessed
its slow transformation, almost did not recognize either. - Mr. D.
Salvador friend - said the priest -. According ensures a good man who
came yesterday of Pamplona, there is the voice that I have come to
the factions and I'm at the helm of a company escopeteros.
The few
sentences, however, that were more or less legible, conveyed the fact
that a vessel had been wrecked on the island in 1848; that the crew had
lived there eighteen months when a ship, chancing to pass that way,
rescued them; that they had no provisions to leave for the use of
unfortunates who might chance to be cast away there in future; and that
there was a garden, with some vegetables in it, about--

Here the writing became quite illegible.

"Now, we must find that garden," said the doctor, "and as we've not much
daylight left, we must begin at once.  Come along, lads."

In half an hour they found the garden, with potatoes growing in it, and
a few other roots that were new to them.

Rejoicing over their discoveries the party started back without delay
for the camp, carrying the pot, the frying-pan, etcetera, along with
them, and not forgetting a good slice of the seal in passing.  Arriving
late that night, they found Bob Massey and the women already enjoying a
supper of albatross soup.

"Hooroo, Bob!" exclaimed O'Connor, flourishing the frying-pan in his
excitement, "we've found some praties, boy!  Shovel out some o' that
into this, honey, an' I'll soon let ye smell the smell of an Irish
stew!"

Next day the party removed from the camp and took up their abode in the
old hut, which was soon repaired sufficiently to keep out wind and rain,
and the skin of the seal--with that of another killed next day--was
large enough to screen off part of the hut as a separate chamber for the
women.

From that time forward they had no lack of food, for they succeeded in
killing plenty of seals, and in snaring a great many rabbits, though
they failed entirely to kill any of the goats.  And thus they lived for
several months in comparative comfort, though suffering considerably
from cold and bad weather.

During all that time the poor women were kept pretty busy cooking,
looking after domestic matters, and mending the garments of the men.
This last they accomplished by means of needles made from albatross
bones and the finely divided sinews of various animals, instead of
thread.  When the European garments were worn out--which they were, long
before deliverance was sent to them--Nell Massey proved her fitness for
a Robinson Crusoe life, by actually splitting the sealskins--which were
as thick as sole leather--so as to obtain material thin enough for
clothing.

Of course, a flagstaff had been among the first things erected.  It
stood on a prominent hill, and a seal-skin flag was hoisted thereon, to
attract any vessel that might chance to pass that way, but the flag
fluttered in vain, for, as we have said, the island lay far out of the
usual track of commerce.

Although poor Mrs Mitford appeared to become resigned to her great loss
as time passed by, it was evident to her kind-hearted female companions
that she was not recovering from the shock she had received.  In spite
of their care of her she grew thinner and older-looking every day, and
although she quietly took her share of the work, she had become sad and
silent--caring little apparently for what was going on around her, and
never indulging in those prolonged observations of an irrelevant nature,
to which she had been addicted before her husband's disappearance.

Things were in this state when, about two months after their landing, a
boat-voyage to the western cliffs of the island was arranged for
purposes of further exploration.


STORY ONE, CHAPTER 11.

Within the dark recesses of a great cavern in the western cliffs, in the
midst of a mass of wreckage, there sat one morning a man whose general
appearance might have suggested to a beholder "the wild man of the
cave"--or, at the least, an unhappy maniac--for his grey locks were long
and unkempt, his eyes bloodshot and wild, his garments torn, so that his
wasted limbs were exposed in numerous places, and his beard and
moustache dishevelled and bristling.

No one looking at that gaunt creature--not even the mother who bore
him--would have easily recognised John Mitford; yet it was he.

On the day when he mysteriously disappeared he had come upon a great
hollow, or hole, of about sixty yards in diameter, which appeared to
descend into the very depths of the earth.  The sides of the hollow
sloped towards the centre, and were covered with bushes.  Noting this,
our romantic friend resolved to explore the spot.  He descended
cautiously till he came to a place where the hole had narrowed to about
twenty feet in diameter, and the herbage ceased because of the absence
of the earth to sustain it.  Filled with eager curiosity, the reckless
man held on to a branch and stretched his head over the edge of the
hole.  He saw nothing but blackness.  He soon felt something, however,
for the branch suddenly broke off, and John went headlong down into that
hole!

Then and there he would certainly have paid for his curiosity with his
life, had not a mass of earth, a few feet further down, and against
which he struck, broken his fall in some measure, and shunted him off to
the opposite wall of the rock.  This latter proved to be a slope so
steep that it let him slide, like lightning, to the bottom, a depth of
about thirty feet or more, where he was stopped with such violence that
he lay stunned for a considerable time.

Recovering, he found that no bones were broken, and that, indeed, he was
not much damaged considering the violence of the fall; but the
satisfaction and thankfulness that this undoubtedly caused him were
diminished by the fact that he was in total darkness, and at the bottom
of a hole of unknown depth.  A feeling of horror rushed over him at the
thought of being thus, as it were, buried alive.  Springing up, he felt
all round the walls of his prison for some inequalities or projections,
by which he might climb out, but none such could he find.  The place was
like a well of not more than about ten feet wide, with smooth rocky
sides, which were almost perpendicular as far up as he could reach.  On
looking upward, he could see the mouth of the hole, through which he had
fallen, glimmering like a little star above him.

After a fruitless search of nearly half-an-hour the poor man sat down on
a piece of fallen rock, over which he had stumbled several times in his
search, and a deep groan burst from him as he began to realise the fact
that escape from the place was impossible, and that a lingering death
awaited him--for he could scarcely hope that his companions would find
him in such a place.  Hope, however, is hard to kill in the human
breast.  Perhaps they might hear him if he shouted.  Immediately he
began to shout for help with all the strength of his lungs.  Then, as no
answering shout came down from the little star above--at which he
continuously gazed--a feeling of wild despair took possession of him,
and he yelled and shrieked in mortal agony until his vocal chords
refused to act, and nothing but a hoarse whisper passed his parched
lips.  Overcome at last, alike with horror and exhaustion, he fell to
the ground and became partially unconscious.

How long he lay thus he could not tell; but, on recovering and looking
up, he found that the star was gone--telling plainly that night had set
in.

Then it was, when all hope of delivering himself, or of being delivered
by others, had fled, that a word which had been uttered by Dr Hayward
to a dying man on board the ship, leaped into John Mitford's mind like a
gleam of light.  "Call upon Me in the time of trouble and I will deliver
thee, and thou shalt glorify Me."  He had seen this invitation accepted
by the dying man and deliverance obtained--if a happy smile and a
triumphant gaze across the river of death were to be regarded as
testimony.  "But, then," thought John Mitford, "that was spiritual
deliverance.  Here it is a hard physical fact, from which nothing short
of a miracle can deliver me.  No--it is impossible!"

Was it a voice within him, or an old memory, that immediately whispered
the words, "With God all things are possible?"  At all events, the poor
man rose up slowly in a somewhat calmer frame of mind, and began once
more to feel round the walls of his narrow prison.  He found nothing
mew, save that once he narrowly escaped falling down what seemed to be a
still deeper hole among the fallen rocks already referred to.  Then he
lay down--or rather fell on the floor exhausted--and slept till morning.
The fact that another day had begun was only ascertainable by the
shining of the star-like mouth of the hole.  He attempted again to
shout, but found that his voice had left him, and that even if his
comrades should return to the place he could not make them hear!  In the
fit of despair which followed he went round and round his living tomb
like some wild beast in a cage.  During one of these perambulations, he
stumbled again over the fallen rocks, dropped into the hole behind them,
and slid a few feet downwards, but not rapidly, for the slope was
gradual, and it terminated on a flat floor.  Looking cautiously round,
on reaching this lower depth, he saw what appeared to be a faint light
far beneath him, and considerably in advance of the spot where he stood,
or rather to which he clung.

Gradually his mind calmed, and, resolving to make for this light, he
groped his way downward.  It was a long and wearisome scramble,
involving many a slip and slide, and not a few falls, (for it was made,
of course, in total darkness), and the distant light did not appear to
become stronger or nearer.  At last it seemed as though it were growing.
Then John found himself on ground over which he could walk, guiding
himself by touching perpendicular walls of rock on either side with his
hands.  It was a great split in the mountain, caused perhaps by those
mighty subterranean forces, which some men recognise as volcanic action,
whilst others, admitting--but passing beyond--second causes, recognise
them as tools with which God is moulding this world according to His
will.

"Strange!" thought the man, as he moved slowly forward.  "Was this split
made hundreds--perhaps thousands--of years ago, for the purpose of
enabling me to escape?"

"Certainly not--absurd, presumptuous idea," answered Unbelief, smartly.

"It was," remarked Faith, slowly, "made, no doubt, for hundreds--it may
be millions--of other purposes, but among these purposes the saving of
your life was certainly in the mind of Him who `knows all things from
the beginning,' and with whom even the falling of a sparrow is a matter
for consideration."

We do not assert that John Mitford's reasoning took the precise form of
these words, for many minds can think somewhat profoundly without being
able to express themselves clearly; but some such thoughts undoubtedly
coursed through John's mind, as he moved through that subterranean
labyrinth, and finally emerged--through a narrow crack, not so large as
an ordinary door--upon the inner margin of a stupendous cavern.

With a fervent "Thank God!" and a hopeful leap of the heart, the poor
man beheld the waters of the sea rushing up to his very feet; and beyond
the cave's mouth lay the grand ocean itself, like a bright picture in a
black frame.  But what was that projecting from the water, not twenty
yards from where he stood?  The broken mast of a sunken wreck!
Mitford's heart almost stood still, for he became aware that he had made
his way to the very cavern, in which the ill-fated _Lapwing_ had met her
doom, and around him were masses of wreckage that had been washed up and
thrown on the rocks at the inner end of the cave where he stood.

An involuntary shudder passed through the man's frame as he glanced
round expecting to see the dead bodies of his late shipmates.  But
nothing of the kind was visible, and the spars, masts, and other
wreckage which had reached the rocks had been shattered into "matchwood"
by frequent gales.

John Mitford now hastened in eager hope along the sides of the cave
towards its mouth, intending to go out to the base of the cliffs,
forgetting, in his eagerness, that the mouth could not be reached
without a boat.  He soon discovered this, and was then thrown into
another fit of despair by remembering that he could not swim.

Oh! how bitterly he blamed himself for having neglected to acquire such
a simple accomplishment.  He might have learnt it when young, had he not
been indifferent, or lazy about it.  Often had he been advised to learn
it by companions, but had treated the matter lightly and let the chance
go by--and now, only fifty yards or so of deep water intervened between
the end of the ledges of rock and the outside of the cavern, where he
might perhaps find foothold enough to scramble along the base of the
cliffs--but those fifty yards were equal to the Atlantic to him, he
could not swim that distance to save his life.  Once or twice, in a fit
of desperation, he had almost plunged in to attempt it, and take his
chance.  Fortunately his courage failed.  Had he taken the plunge his
fate would no doubt have been sealed.

Returning to the inner end of the cave he searched among the wreckage
for wood, with which to make a raft, but it was so shattered that he
found no pieces large enough to be thus used.  He found, however, a
barrel of pork and another of pease jammed into a crevice.  These proved
an immense relief to his feelings, for they secured him against absolute
starvation, which he had begun to think stared him in the face.

From that time forward the unfortunate man made incessant and wild
efforts to get out of the cave.  He climbed and scrambled about until
his clothes were almost torn off his back.  He gathered the largest
masses of wood he could find and tied them together in bundles, until he
had made something like a raft; but John was not a handy workman; his
raft overturned the first time he tried it, and went to pieces, and he
would have been drowned at that time if he had not been within grasping
distance of the rocks.  As it was, he got a fright which made him
finally turn from that method of escape in despair.

Then the raw pork and hard pease tried him severely, and brought on a
complaint which lasted a considerable time and greatly reduced his
strength, but John was tough, and recovered--though not much more than
the skeleton of his former self remained.

Thus he continued to exist in that cavern, during all the time that his
wife and friends were mourning him as dead; and in this condition was he
there seated, on the morning in which this chapter opens.

"Weary, weary--desolation!" moaned the unfortunate man, lifting his head
and gazing round, with the air of one from whom all hope has long since
departed.

It is said, or supposed, that when a spoke in Fortune's wheel is at the
lowest, there must needs be a rise.  Mitford's experience at this time
would seem to give ground for belief in the saying; for the word
"desolation" had scarcely passed his lips, when distant voices of men
were heard, causing his heart to bound violently.  Next moment a boat
glided in front of the cave's mouth.

John Mitford sprang up and gave vent to a yell!

Hope raised to strong life after being long deferred; despair suddenly
trampled in the dust; joy bounding as from the tomb into rampant being--
and a host of indescribable sentiments and passions found vent in that
tremendous, that inconceivable howl!

And its effect on those in the boat?--Well--

That morning our exploring party had resumed their voyage with somewhat
saddened hearts, for they remembered the look of the coast well, and
knew that an hour or so would bring them to the cave where the _Lapwing_
had gone down.  Even Black Ned had become sentimental, and given vent to
a few expressions of a semi-religious nature!

"We can't be far from it now," said Dr Hayward, as the men ceased
rowing, and the boat glided slowly, silently along.

"It's a gruesome place," remarked Black Ned, in a low voice.

"To think that so many lives were lost here--or hereabouts," murmured
Tomlin.

"An' their ghost, maybe, hangin' about!" suggested Slag, with a
superstitious glance over his shoulder.

Just then Hayward bade O'Connor get up and stand in the bow with the
boat-hook, ready to fend off,--an order which the Irishman, having been
somewhat awed by the tone of the conversation, obeyed in silence.

It was at this point that they glided in front of the cave, and drew
forth the yell which burst upon them like a clap of thunder.  The shock
to the nervous system of each was terrific.  In the case of O'Connor it
was visible, for he fell flat back into the bottom of the boat and
fetched Jarring a tremendous whack on the head with the boat-hook in
falling.  Afterwards, Terrence asserted stoutly that a slip of the foot
as he stood on the th'ort was the cause, but those who knew him best
held that it was "a case of nerves."

Need it be said that, on recovering nervous equilibrium, the joy of
rescuers and rescued was intense?

"Come along, let's take 'im home at wanst," cried the Irishman, when
they had got the poor dazed man into the boat.  "Isn't it Peggy that'll
open her eyes an' screech for joy when she sots her eyes on ye!"

"We'll have to wash and comb an' clothe him first," said Tomlin.

He did not say "shave," for they had no razors,--and by that time the
beards of most of the party were as long as Mitford's; but their locks
had been trimmed by means of a clasp-knife super-sharpened, whereas
Mitford's were in wildest disorder.

That night they encamped in the wreck-cave, made a fire, and prepared a
splendid supper of pork and pea-soup for John and themselves, after
which they subjected their recovered comrade to a scrubbing and cropping
and repairing of habiliments that almost proved fatal to his
constitution.  Next day they loaded the boat with all the pork and pease
they could find, as well as portions of cordage that might be useful.
- The same thing happens to me - "said Salvador -.

No family, alone, deprived of all love, it seems that I am condemned for
my sins, to live on the ice. I also recently visited our town and I had
the wings of the fallen heart to me a stranger in my hometown. - I was
chasing the night shadows that do not know what came out of that black
community. All the village dogs bark I ¡mil radishes! with terrifying
fury. - Also me. I found some people recognized me, but I looked with
great suspicion, as if to remove something. - I went the same.
So sad to know how is not having anyone in the world who rely on
a penalty in the heart, a joy, a hope. - I.

And then I felt old, very old. - The same thing myself. And I said, 'if
I were next to me to be any one, even a child would not leave the
camps in search of adventure, not so much because I afanaría queens
or Juan Pierre. "- Like I thought I ... .

If something consoling me at that mournful solitude was remembering
things from childhood.

And when they saw so clearly going through the places where we used
to play on the site of the school, in the atrium of the church and
the bridge, and house of the blacksmith Uncle Roque ... - So I went
dead time playing in my memory those days ....

How many times I remembered Doña Fermina your poor mother! It was so good!
...

Do not put a half to sit next to a door that is on your right as we
entered the courtyard - Yes. - I seem to see the Father Respaldiza,
counting chascarrillos, and that Mrs.

Perpetua who lived more than one hundred years.

I remember your mother very much when I entertain myself playing
with you and other Chicuelo, I went into the yard of your house. Hugged
me, kissed me and put me on his knees, but I desasía your arms to run
and climb a pile of beams ....

Were there not a bunch of beams in the courtyard - Yes. - And your mother
did not have many chickens? - Yes. - Reñimos One day a chicken and
gave us slaps you and me.

Another day we took blood to give us strength and we were beating
two _Ecce-homos_ ....

After .... Navarro took a big sigh after saying: - It seemed we were
destined for a dreadful rivalry for life .... One day, when we were
grandecitos, returned to compose a ring of iron in the house of Uncle
Roque, and found Genara leaving school .... This concludes the memories.
As a light turns off when the wind blow, Navarro closed mouth,
lips pressed hard as if I have one of the two lip alone, frunció eyebrows
making them as a knot to hold and tighten the skin of the whole front,
and finally dumped his hand so forcefully on the arm of the chair,
which was a good point to jump invalid chipped. - It seems impossible
- he said later - that enough years so that they become angels
demons, beasts and men .... You hear ...-- said with haughtiness - If
I do not talk ... dígolo if I had escaped a sentence indicating
readiness to forgive, blandurillas of heart or other such thing,
unworthy of my character and my entire honor.

She will always be for me the bad temptations and torments of my life,
and you ... a man whom I do not see nor be able to see without ever violent
antipathy. Make my appreciation of rare candor, and you can not
appreciate me otherwise .... Do you want me to say more clearly?
Then I burn the same blood now than before. Beware of your words,
beware of your actions, suspicious of our relationship, which could
be stage machinery invented for you, beware of your repentance,
and as more difficult to tell who will win my win heaven, well that
will let me in peace and not come here with embassies hermanazgos or
sentimental, because again I will not have the holy patience I have
now: I know, you know my cool. This disease has taken me demon chains
and shackles, but I heal, with a thousand radishes, heal, and I swear
that I will not suffer. Have you heard? I will not hold me
.... Jokes that I pass atrocities spending in the world .... I do not
look it, and I promise I do not look. That is all I can do. Saying it
pointed to the door.

It was almost evening and the dark part sacristanesca each of the
characters he saw his partner as his own shadow. Salvador got up from
his seat and the guerrilla despidiose this laconic sentence: - Bye.
Do not look. If you ever come to my door, depending on how you respond
to her call.-V-out, and when he went looking for the door down the hall,
which oscurísimo as the Cave of Montesinos was, faced with a package
which, by the sharp shriek that followed the crash, proved to be
very sensitive woman and woman. - Brutísimo, wild ....

Have you no eyes in the face - the voice shouted -. What are those ways?
- Lady - Salvador said taking off his hat, but do not drop - dispénseme
you. I have eyes, but I gain nothing, because there is no light in the
corridor. .... Looking for the door - And perhaps I am the door, sir
silly ... What considerations spend with the ladies the men of this
house! ... Speaking and the lady opened the door and with the
clarity of the ladder hesitant to come could see it and realize that
Salvador seemed ready to leave too. He wore a black mantilla dulleta
which ornament had entered skins of various animals, skilfully combined
with that gal in the centuries before lucieron robe of some saint or
the breast of a brave officer Walon guards. Salvador, which had sometimes
the lady, met her. I used to look with respect to that pitiful decline
more laughable. - I now ask you a thousand pardons - he said - for my
stupidity .... I also leave you, and if I may would be happy to
accompany it. - Thank you, thank you very much - said the mummy giving
direction to some steps in the ladder which warned marked pruritus
Agility -. I also need to apologize for this inconvenience to you some
words, confusing the man with coarse, that Zugarramurdi which is movable
in a path. Salvador arm offered him she had no difficulty in
accepting. Mummy down, threw it in this question, caught in a whisper:
- Are you a friend of Mr. D. Charles - Yes, ma'am. - If you do not
deceive me, is the first time you come home. Ah! this seems like
the house of Roque Touch me, as people enter and exit. And it's not
all people of principle, or we keep the miramientos we are. No wonder
that I admire you for your civility, because we live in an age in
which we can say that no gentleman .... I venture that you were
expecting?

- Yes, madam, I am waiting ... - Salvador said to say the least.
- The waiting of Catalonia, to start dancing .... But have you, sir, what
nonsense!

heroic to pretend that this nation is ruled by a queen in its
infancy. - A foolish, yes ma'am. - Because you will undoubtedly be
the first swords in the Sacred War to be prepared. - Of the first
no ... .... more - you will not be modest.

Modesty is inseparable from the true merit - the lady said, bringing
to the lips with no little labor, from the bottom of his soul dry
a drop of sweetness stiff -.

Maybe I'm wrong, but you D. Joseph O'Donnell - I'm not O'Donnell. - Is
not you the Regency commissioner secret that has formed in Catalonia,
led by the Superior of the Jesuits?

I am aware of everything, with me, sir, are not worth the mysteries. - I
swear to you, ma'am, I'm not the one you assumed. - Neither Colonel D. 6
John Fields, who is in the hollow of his hand, as they say, to half the
volunteers realistic Spain - Nor. - You see that I'm something
naughty - said the mummy shrinking so amojamado the face to smile,
to Salvador, the look was something to fear -.

Oh!

I do not lack insight, and in terms of relationships with people involved
in the cause of the legitimate throne, who surely will not win me
....

Knight, you know that an awful cold? Salvador noticed that the lady
grabbed his arm more heavily. To feel the pointy finger and rubbing
skeleton of the old tafetanes clothing, as well as the smell of
leather permeated tomb, felt it was a really cold that ice that the
lady spoke. - It is very cold, yes lady. - And the streets are very
lonely.

If you were so good that I would bring to the house where I visit ....
- With great pleasure, ma'am. - It is near: near San Sebastian. -
Half a league - Monsalud said to himself, but not taking occupations
took the tour at either employee gift as a helpless woman who seemed
to thank him. - I to thank you again - that said - for their kindness,
which is more worthy of appreciation at a time they have finished
the Knights ....

Soon to arrive: I'm going home from Paquita Aransis, Mrs Colonel D. Peter
King.

Do you know the dignified family - I do not know, but that name Aransis
is no stranger to me. - It is a noble lineage of Catalonia. Have you
been in Catalonia ... Perhaps you know the Count of Miralcamp, which is
Aransis, the mayor of Cervera, which is D. Raimundo Aransis. I also know
in Solsona Aransis a nun who is the sister of Paquita. - Ah! yes, I
know - said Salvador promptly injured by live memories. - This family
is related to with us - said the lady, who was tired hackneyed
to be mummy -.

Paquita is so good, so loving, so good and so Christian women from her
home .... She has two children who are two pieces of glory, says Father
Gracian, Juanito now going to Seville to study law, along with their
paternal uncles, and perfect, a perfect angel of God. The poor girl has
been sick recently with a malignant calenturas that have put the edge
of the grave .... How much we have suffered! The Countess of Rumble and
I alternábamos for velarla ... one night it .... otherwise I You surely
know the countess of Rumble, Presentacioncita and his daughter and his
son Gasparito Grijalva, this pocket, which ends in liberalote hanging
.... - If you are liberal, not end in fine. Salvador had to temper step
, to discover that his partner was rather suffocated. - You - that
said, sucking the air quickly, as an old boot that needs to be nurtured
very agitated - reportedly has lived enough to know many people,
have many friends and attend many events, but do not need to see
family and spend time to see friends die, fortunes move, death and
dreams fall into ruins things more real life. - Something even
Algoso that I have seen unfortunately lady - said Salvador surprised
that sentimentality that somewhat artistic Avenio well with the
pack funeral of his distinguished interlocutor. - Oh!

gentleman - said that stopping and nailing him in his eyes that shone
like the last embers of a sepulchral hachón - is not it sad to see
so many dead things all around us, and feel the cold of the soul
are the memories that wither, when they move? They whisper a sad as
the swirl of leaves and give the chills of autumn rain Is not that
right, this is not true - is true - said that participating Salvador
chill.

And the spark was extinguished in funeral Salome's eyes because his eyelids
fell like skinny church off and left the yellow face in its original
aspect acecinada thing and completely dry. - Gentlemen, I have a
horrible cold! - murmured the lady, trembling -. Let's hurry. The sky
was as often seen on winter nights, clean up the starry host, to waste,
as if to leave the vault of heaven from which stars and can be pushed off
the post to each other . The air still, serene, I do not know what was
only comparable to the eerie glare of the finished blade sharpening.

The cold stars lengthen its rays across the vast region of invisible
ice, and the moon, but also had moon clearly disseminated by streets
and green spaces.

The floor looked like the bed of a river that was just dry, leaving
bare his limo full of phosphorescence.

Three or four blocks across the partner without saying a word, and to
reach a portal area in the middle of the street Huertas detúvose the
living dead, and hold the arm of the gentleman, with a single voice
announced the end of the day. - I - said with an expression of pity,
and then withdrawing his hand slowly to bring it to the head, where
demanded redress the folds of a blanket and guedeja blonde who
dropped out of the rows where the comb had a few hours before -.

Has already bothered you enough. Well the ride has been ... and we must
thank God that we have not seen anyone, because if we had seen .... Ah!
you do not know to what extent it is daring slander these days ....
Who says that I am not tell me heresies without accompanying story for
having left the night for you - Madam, I do not say anything --
Salvador noted, suppressing the smile that came to his lips. - Oh!

Who knows .... Now everything is judged by the look bad. Ah! or
the snow itself is free from being stained or soiled .... Leave
you ... I understand that you want to prolong the conversation on the
site, but can not be, can not in any way. After providing your
home with no little flattery, asked the gentleman had the kindness to
tell his name to get to know the person I should thank gallantry in an
unprecedented era Woe! in a dire time in sterile and there was no
gentleman. That name, mummy said it with pleasure and then he said:
- Military - No, ma'am, paisano. - Andaluz - Alavés. - And to death
a legitimate defender of the throne ... - From the throne of Isabella
II. - So what? you .... - Mason, ma'am. Al express well, with the smile
on the lips, Salvador thought that did not deserve serious answers that
impertinent questioning. The mummy was on the verge of getting rid
powder heinous to hear the word. Shaken apolilladas within their skins
and their ajados tafetanes, llevose hands to his head, he
launched an exclamation of pity and sorrow, and for a short time away
from heaven, not their eyes there to demand mercy. - Mason! -- repeated
after looking at that, she was a soldier of the militia of Satan -.

Who would say! And pointing with his hand thin cover canelo glove, a
light from a distance looked like Lantern tavern or coffee, and
sigh said: - Where is that light is you meet your buddies Caballero ....
if you allow me to lead a prayer, I will say that the world is
nothing you mason.

Everything is ready for the triumph of the true and legitimate monarchy,
and it is a pity that you should perish, because they all die, no doubt
.... When you told me that Mason is vi ... I'm always seeing things
that were true then ... I saw a pile of dead in the middle of which
a head peeked ....

It took him a hand and glove in contact with the cinnamon, which
barely conceal his thin fingers tough fossilized, Salvador felt him a
cold glacial, reaching her heart. - That was the head of you -
continued mummy -. You laugh, but I do not, because experience has
taught me to give a high value on my heart, and in time to our knowledge
little I have seen the remarkable garments you. Oh! Yes, there are still
men, but soon, very soon may not have any. Bye. Strengthe you hand a
moment and disappeared into the portal, dark and deep as a tomb.

Salvador stayed a while in the door, looking oscurísimo hole that had
swallowed his lady that night, and whispered these words: -- -
Poor lady!

... certainly is crazy.

Alejose slowly, unable to rid his mind as soon as I would like the image
of the ghost who had his arm and seemed typical of the Faerie
Sprites frost and clear nights of January in the climate of Madrid.

After walking a bit mechanical and without fixed address, hallose
under the bluff shortly before he brought his hand glove canelo. - Coffee
of San Sebastian - thought -.

Since I'm going here. There is no shortage of friends with whom they spend
time.

VI-coffee-not crowded, and its heavy and foggy atmosphere could be
disseminated to groups and even individuals.

Some individuals with a hat thrown back, the coat hanging on the shoulders
or two one, talk to shouting between sip and sip without touching policy
issues, as gender was not a screaming deal. Other low and frightened
voice, as if to say a few spells on the black liquid, who gave a mysterious
character quiromántico which consisted of ingredients. These gentlemen
of the coat and dragged the elbows on the table and the hat to the eyebrows
sunk, were the arrangers of public affairs. Since then engaged in
preference to the patriotic task of settling the country, without
trade or wanting to learn it, they felt the irresistible vocation of
lucrative employment. Some also did some ingénita disagreement with
the government, and less exalted ideas of fair or styling desire the good
of the crowd. Of all these species patricians had that night but a few
good shows at the cafe in San Sebastian. He had not gone four steps
Monsalud on the premises when he was called from opposite sides. He
went where he had seen more of their expensive tastes, and after
greeting several people sat in the most secluded table in the company
of two subjects. One of them seemed to have long-standing and close
friendship Salvador because he greeted with great affection. It was
middle-aged and good appearance, called Mr. Eugenio Aviraneta: Guipuzcoa
their homeland was very special and had the talent of conversation,
not as low in Spain, where much has been racing to find stories or
refer to either raise or art matters and issues of all kinds.

The other was younger, of pulling a pale olive color, hair and
eyebrows of great darkness, the sharp nose and thick mustache
short, shaped by the knife in a unique fashion with the more
ridiculous that you can imagine, the which was to draw two straight
lines from the windows of the nose to the ends of the mouth, drawing
a small mustache and severely triangular _bigotillo took the name
of moco_. olive character also carried a knob tail rabbit, and
cheeks short pin or chops, also modeled by a knife with a dedication
that came almost up to the job of a rapist with art of the sculptor.

This brief and accompanied by Tupe mechoncillos on the ears were cries
declaring that the top and crowned with unique head had to be one of those
huge morriones of narrow base anchísima cap, visor carrilleras
small copper and suspended from the sides of faceplate.

Such incommensurate morrión was watching, yes, the good Lord that
head by the force of analogy, but was discovered and wear civilian
clothes.

But if a thread is removed by a ball, usually on one side also drawn
a morrión, and thus could be a mouth full to say that our military
was an individual and more details _ayacucho_. - This is my friend
Captain Rufete -- Aviraneta being said about their two comrades -.

Now tell us, tell us what is your life, man. After that you're rich
there is no one to you. They spoke at length of things in life, travel,
hunting, disease, and not knowing how to stop the great question of
the day, namely that the King does not die so presto some crooks
wanted, it was decided to solemnly swear Isabelita as heir to the
throne, and that the buenazo D.

Carlos goes to Portugal. Filmed conversation idea in mind, until he came
to Salvador Aviraneta in the arm and said with mystery: - If you
want to handle a delicate mission, there is no objection confiártela.
- I know that conspiracy, but by who? - Salvador replied laughing - By
Cristina, by D. Carlos or both at once? - You know me and know that with
my own wings not to fly any bat. I am committed to exploring the liberal
mood of the people to know under what conditions it could be if a civil
war. - Books - _ayacucho_ said with emphasis - are and will always
be beside the Princess Princess if you get a pillow in her crib
by _The best of códigos_.

_libres_ The call to the liberals and códigos_ _The best of the
constitution was 12, with many other phrases, a special style for a long
time prevailed in all the literary events of the match progressed.
- Calle you, man, for God's sake - he said Aviraneta reprimanded
with a spontaneous gesture of the captain -.

The _libres_, as you say, and liberals, as I call them, are so divided
that can not hear you if you speak the same two views with them.

There are plenty of idiots who can not be started as the head _del best
of códigos_; some solemn crooks who have power and malice to the rabble,
shouted, if they leave, _constitución or muerte_; is the group of
_anilleros_ or the _sabios_, which denies them all if the two Houses
with the Charter, the French, and even think that someone wants to
have three cameras, not to sound rather two.

He was most deadly in
his feelings in calm weather, but there were occasions when he took
pleasure in sallying forth accompanied by his like-minded sons, Colonel
Wind and Major Snow.  And it was a tremendous sight, that few people
cared to see except through windows, when those three, arm-in-arm, went
swaggering through the land together.

One Christmas morning, at the time we write of, Jack and his two sons
went careering, in a happy-go-lucky sort of way, along the London
streets towards the "west end," blinding people's eyes as they went,
reversing umbrellas, overturning old women, causing young men to
stagger, and treating hats in general as if they had been black
footballs.  Turning into Saint James's Park they rushed at the royal
palace, but, finding that edifice securely guarded from basement to
roof-tree, they turned round, and, with fearless audacity, assaulted the
Admiralty and the Horse-Guards--taking a shot at the clubs in passing.
It need scarcely be recorded that they made no impression whatever on
those centres of wealth and power.

Undismayed--for Jack and his sons knew nothing either of fear or
favour--they went careering westward until they came to a palatial
mansion, at the half-open front door of which a pretty servant girl
stood peeping out.  It was early.  Perhaps she was looking for the
milkman--possibly for the policeman.  With that quick perception which
characterises men of war, Major Snow saw and seized his opportunity.
Dashing forward he sprang into the hall.  Colonel Wind, not a whit less
prompt, burst the door wide open, and the three assailants tumbled over
each other as they took possession of the outworks of the mansion.

But "Jeames" was not far distant.  The screams of Mary drew him forth,
he leaped into the hall, drove out the intruders, and shut the door with
a crash, but with no further damage to the foe than the snipping off
part of Major Snow's tails, which Mary swept up into a dust shovel and
deposited in the coal-hole, or some such dark region below.

Our trio possessed neither fear nor pride.  They were also destitute of
taste, and had no respect for persons.  Treating their repulse as a good
joke, they turned round and went hilariously along the Strand, embracing
every one they met, young and old, rich and poor, pretty and plain, with
pointed impartiality, until they reached the City.  There we will leave
them to revel amongst the poor, while we return to the mansion at the
west end.

In two snug bedrooms thereof two young men lay in their comfortable
beds, partially awake and yawning--the one flat on his back as if laid
out for his last sleep; the other coiled into a bundle with the
bedclothes, as if ready to be carried off to the laundry with the next
washing.  The rooms were connected by a door which stood open, for the
occupants were twin brothers; their united ages amounting to forty
years.

"Ned," said the straight one to the bundle.

"Well, Tom," (sleepily).

"Did you hear that noise--like a cannon-shot?"

"Ya-i-o-u yes--som'ing tumbled--door bang'd," (snore).

"Hallo, Ned!" cried Tom, suddenly leaping out of bed and beginning to
dress in haste; "why, it's Christmas morning!  I had almost forgot.  A
Merry Christmas to you, my boy!"

"M'rry Kissm's, ol' man, but don' waken me.  What's use o' gettin' up?"

"The use?" echoed Tom, proceeding rapidly with his toilet; "why, Ned,
the use of rising early is that it enables a man to get through with his
work in good time, and I've a deal of work to do to-day at the
east-end."

"So 'v' I," murmured Ned, "at th' wes' end."

"Indeed.  What are you going to do?"

"Sk-t."

"Sk-t?  What's that?"

"Skate--ol' man, let m' 'lone," growled Ned, as he uncoiled himself to
some extent and re-arranged the bundle for another snooze.

With a light laugh Tom Westlake left his brother to enjoy his repose,
and descended to the breakfast-room, where his sister Matilda, better
known as Matty, met him with a warm reception.

Everything that met him in that breakfast-parlour was warm.  The fire,
of course, was warm, and it seemed to leap and splutter with a
distinctly Christmas morning air; the curtains and carpets and
arm-chairs were warm and cosy in aspect; the tea-urn was warm, indeed it
was hot, and so were the muffins, while the atmosphere itself was
unusually warm.  The tiny thermometer on the chimney-piece told that it
was 65 degrees of Fahrenheit.  Outside, the self-registering thermometer
indicated 5 degrees below zero!

"Why, Matty," exclaimed Tom, as he looked frowningly at the instrument,
"I have not seen it so low as that for years.  It will freeze the Thames
if it lasts long enough."

Matty made no reply, but stood with her hands clasped on her brother's
arm gazing contemplatively at the driving snow.

"What are you thinking about?" asked Tom.

"About the poor," answered Matty, as she went and seated herself at the
breakfast-table.  "On such a terrible morning as this I feel so
inexpressibly selfish in sitting down to an overflowing meal in the
midst of such warmth and comfort, when I know that there are hundreds
and thousands of men and women and children all round us who have
neither fire nor food sufficient--little clothing, and no comfort.  It
is dreadful," added Matty, as an unusually fierce gust dashed the snow
against the windows.

Tom was like-minded with his sister, but he could not suppress a smile
as he looked into her pretty little anxious face.

"Yes, Matty, it _is_ dreadful," he replied, "and the worst of it is that
we can do so little, so very little, to mend matters.  Yet I don't feel
as you do about the selfishness of enjoying a good breakfast in
comfortable circumstances, for it is God who has given us all that we
have, as well as the power to enjoy it.  I grant, that if we simply
enjoyed our good things, and neither thought of nor cared for the poor,
we should indeed be most abominably selfish, but happily that is not our
case this morning.  Have we not risen an hour earlier than usual to go
out and do what we can to mitigate the sorrows of the poor?  Are we not
about to face the bitter blast and the driving snow on this Christmas
morning for that very purpose? and should we not be rendered much less
capable of doing so, if we were to start off on our mission with cold
bodies and half-filled--I beg pardon, pass the muffins, dear.  Besides,
sister mine, if you were to go out on such a morning cold and underfed,
would it not be probable that I should have to go and fetch a doctor for
you instead of taking you out to help me in aiding and comforting poor
people?"

"That may be all very true, Tom," returned Matty, with a dissatisfied
and puzzled look, "but I cannot help feeling that I have so much, so
_very_ much, more than I need of everything, while the thousands I speak
of have so little--so very little.  Why could not rich people like us be
content with plainer things, and use fewer things, and so have more to
give to the poor?"

"You have broached a very wide and profound subject, Matty, and it would
probably take us a week to go into it exhaustively, but a few words may
suffice to show you that your remedy would not meet the case.  Suppose
that all the people in England were all at once smitten with your desire
to retrench in order to have more to spare to the poor--and were to act
upon their convictions; to determine that henceforth they would live on
the plainest food, such as potatoes, mutton, and bread; what, I ask you,
would become of the great army of confectioners?  Would they not be
thrown out of employment, and help, perhaps, to swell the ranks of the
poor?  If the rich ceased to buy pictures, what would become of
painters?  If they gave up books, (horrible to think of!) what would be
the consequences to authors, and what the result to themselves?  If
carriages and horses were not kept, what would become of coachmen and
grooms and ostlers--to say nothing of coach-makers, saddlers,
harness-makers, and their innumerable dependants?  No--living plainly or
simply is not what is wanted, but living reasonably--according to one's
means.  Then, as to your having, as you say, much more than you need--
that does not injure the poor, for nothing of it is wasted.  Does not
part of the surplus go to Mary and James and the other servants, and
much of what they do not consume goes in charity, directly, to the poor
themselves?"

"Well, but," returned Matty, with the distressed and puzzled look still
unabated, "though all you tell me may be quite true, it does not in the
least degree alter the fact that there _is_ something quite wrong in the
condition of the poor of our great cities, which _ought_ to be
remedied."

"Of course it does not, little woman, but it relieves my mind, and it
ought to relieve yours, as to the selfishness of enjoying a good
breakfast."

"But, surely," resumed Matty, with a slightly indignant look and tone,
"surely you don't mean to tell me that there is no remedy for the
miserable condition of the poor, and that the rich must just sigh over
it, or shut their eyes to it, while they continue to revel in luxury?"

"How you fly to extremes, sister!" said Tom, with a laugh, as he neatly
cut the top off a fourth egg.  "I combat your erroneous views, and
straightway you charge me, by implication, with having no views at all!
A remedy there surely is, but the wisest among us are not agreed as to
_what_ it is--chiefly, I think, because the remedy is not simple but
extremely complex.  It cannot be stated in a few words.  It consists in
the wise and prompt application of multiform means--"

"Brother," interrupted Matty with a smile, "do you think I am to be
turned from my quest after this great truth by the stringing together of
words without meaning--at least words vague and incomprehensible?"

"By no means, Matty.  I hope that nothing will ever turn you from your
quest after the best method of helping the poor.  But my words are not
meant to be vague.  By multiform means I would indicate legislation in
numerous channels, and social effort in all its ramifications, besides
the correction of many erroneous modes of thought--such, for instance,
as the putting of the less before the greater--"

"Tom," again interrupted Matty, "I think it is about time to go and put
on my things."

"Not so, sister dear," said Tom impressively; "I intend that you shall
hear me out.  I think that you put the less before the greater when you
talk of `giving' to the poor instead of `considering' the poor.  The
greater, you know, includes the less.  Consideration includes judicious
giving, and the teaching of Scripture is, not to give to, but to
_consider_, the poor.  Now you may be off and get ready--as quickly as
you can, too, for it would never do to keep the poor waiting breakfast!"

With a light laugh and a vigorous step--the result of goodwill to
mankind, good intentions, good feeding, and, generally, good
circumstances--Matilda Westlake ran upstairs to her room at the top of
the house to put on a charming little winter bonnet, a dear little cloak
lined with thick fur, and everything else to match, while Tom busied
himself in meditating on the particular passage of God's Word which he
hoped, by the Spirit's influence, to bring home to the hearts of some of
the poor that Christmas morning.

Half an hour after these two had gone forth to do battle with John Frost
and Sons, Edward Westlake sauntered into the breakfast-room, his right
hand in his pocket and his left twirling the end of an exceedingly
juvenile moustache.

Turning his back to the fire he perused the morning paper and enjoyed
himself thoroughly, while James re-arranged the table for another
sumptuous meal.

Ned was by no means a bad fellow.  On the contrary, his companions
thought and called him a "jolly good fellow."  His father was a jolly,
though a gouty old widower.  Perhaps it was owing to the fact that there
was no mother in the household that Ned smoked a meerschaum in the
breakfast-room while he read the paper.

"Have my skates been sharpened?" he asked, looking over the top of the
paper.

James said that they had been sharpened, and were then lying ready on
the hall table.

Sauntering to the window Ned looked out, and, James having retired, he
made a few remarks himself, which showed the direction of his thoughts.

"Capital!  Ice will be splendid.  Snow won't matter.  Lots of men to
sweep it.  Looks as if the wind would fall, and there's a little bit of
blue sky.  Even if it doesn't clear, the pond is well sheltered.  I do
like a sharp, stinging, frosty day.  Makes one's blood career so
pleasantly!"

With such agreeable thoughts and a splendid appetite Ned Westlake sat
down to breakfast.  Thereafter he put on a thick overcoat, edged with
sable, a thick pair of boots and softly lined gloves, and went out with
the skates swinging on his arm.

Jack Frost and his two sons were still holding high revelry outside.
They met him with impartial violence, but Ned bent forward with a smile
of good-humoured defiance, and went on his way unchecked.

Not so a stout and short old female of the coster-monger class, who,
after a series of wild gyrations that might have put a dancing dervish
to shame, bore down on Ned after the manner of a fat teetotum, and
finally launched herself into his arms.

"Hallo old girl--steady," exclaimed Ned, holding her up with an effort.
"You carry too much sail to venture abroad in such weather."

"Which it were my only one!" gasped the old woman, holding out her
umbrella that had been reversed and obviously shattered beyond repair.
Then, looking up at Ned, "You'd better leave a-go of me, young man.
What will the neighbours think of us?"

Which remark she uttered sternly--all the more that she had securely
hooked herself to the railings and could afford to cast off her friend.

With a solemn assurance that he esteemed her, "the sweetest of the
fair," Ned went smilingly on his way, receiving in reply, "La, now,
who'd 'a' thought it!"

Having twisted this lady's bonnet off, blown her unkempt hair straight
out, and otherwise maltreated her, Colonel Wind, with his father and
brother, went raging along the streets until he came to the
neighbourhood of Whitechapel.  The three seemed rather fond of this
region, and no wonder; for, although never welcomed, they found
themselves strong enough to force an entrance into many a poor home, and
to remain in possession.

Swaggering, in their own noisy and violent manner, into several courts
and blind alleys, they caught up all the lighter articles of rubbish
that lay about, hurled them against the frail and cracked windows--some
of which they broke, and others of which they could not break by reason
of their having been broken already.  They did what was next best,
however,--drove in the old hats and coats and other garments, with which
the square holes had been inefficiently stopped.

"Jolly! ain't it?" remarked a street boy, with a ruddy face and hair
blown straight on end all round, to another street boy with a cast-iron
look and a red nose--both being powerfully robust.

"Prime!" asserted the knight of the red nose.

And then both went eagerly to take liberties with a neighbouring pump,
from the spout of which hung an icicle like a stalactite, the droppings
from which, at an earlier period, had formed a considerable stalagmite
on the stones below.

It is probable that the sick old man on the poor bed in the small room
close to the pump did not think the state of matters either "jolly" or
"prime," for, besides being very old, he was very weak and thin and cold
and hungry; in addition to which Jack Frost had seated himself on the
rickety chair beside the empty grate, and seemed bent on remaining--the
colonel having previously blown open the door and removed a garment
which had sheltered the old man's head, thus permitting the major to
sprinkle a miniature drift on his pillow.

"I hardly like to leave you, gran'father, in such blustery weather,"
said a little maiden of about ten years of age, with filthy garments and
a dirty face, who, if she had been washed and dressed, would have been
distinctly pretty, but who, in the circumstances, was rather plain.  As
she spoke she re-adjusted the garment-screen and removed the snowdrift.

"Don't say that, Martha," replied the old man in a thin weak voice--it
had been strong and deep and resonant once, but Time and Want and
Disease play sad havoc with strong men.

"You _must_ go, darling," resumed the old man after a few seconds' pause
to recover breath.  "You've no chance of a breakfast otherwise.  And--
perhaps--they may give you a bit to bring home for--"

Martha eagerly interrupted the hesitating voice,--and it was easily
interrupted!  "Yes, yes, gran'father.  They'll be sure to let me bring
home some for you.  I'll be quite, _quite_ sure to do it."

She made the promise with great decision, as well she might, for she had
made up her mind to pocket all the food that was given to her except
just a small morsel, which she would nibble in order to make believe
that she was feeding!

"Lock the door and put the key in your pocket," said the old man, while
the child tucked in about him the thin torn counterpane which formed the
only covering to his straw bed.  "An' don't fear for me, darling.  The
Lord is with me.  Be sure to eat as much as you can."

Having regard to her secret intentions, Martha refrained from pledging
herself, but she laughed and nodded significantly as she quitted the
cold, dismal, and shabby room.

It was little Martha's first experience of a "free breakfast."  She had,
indeed, heard of such a thing before, but had not up to that time met
with anything of the kind, so she advanced to "the hall" with some
timidity and much expectation.

The hall was very full, and, as poor little Martha was rather late, she
could not manage to crush in much beyond the door.  Besides, being
small, she could see nothing.  In these depressing circumstances her
heart began to sink, when her attention was attracted by a slight stir
outside the door.  A lady and gentleman were coming in.  It so happened
that the lady in passing trod upon one of Martha's cold little toes, and
drew from the child a sharp cry.

"Oh, my dear, _dear_ little girl!" cried the shocked lady, with a gush
of self-reproach and sympathy, "I'm _so_ sorry--so _very, very_ sorry.
It was so stupid of me!  Have I hurt you much, _dear_ little girl?
Come--come with me."

"Bring her to the stove, Matty, there's more room there to have it
looked to," said the gentleman, in a kind voice.

Much consoled by all this, though still whimpering, little Martha
suffered herself to be led to the front seats, and set on a bench just
below the platform, where she began to bloom under the genial influence
of the stove, and to wonder, with inexpressible surprise, at the mighty
sea of upturned faces in front of her.  As for the toe, it was utterly
forgotten.  The lady's foot, you see, being almost as light as her
heart, had done it no serious injury.  Nevertheless, she continued for a
few minutes to inspect it earnestly and inquire for it tenderly,
regardless of dirt!

"You're _sure_ it is better, dear little child?"

"Oh yes, ma'am, thank you.  I don't feel it at all now.  An' it's _so_
nice to feel warm again!"

What a depth of meaning was unwittingly given to the last two words by
the emphasis of the child-voice.--"Warm"--"Again!"  The lady almost
burst into tears as she thought of all that they implied.  But her
services were required at the harmonium.  With a parting pat on Martha's
curly head, and a bright smile, she hurried away to ascend the platform.

The preliminaries of a feast at which most of the feasters are cold and
hungry--some of them starving--should not be long.  Full well did Tom
Westlake know and appreciate this truth, and, being the donor,
originator, and prime mover in the matter, he happily had it all his own
way.

In the fewest possible words, and in a good loud voice which produced
sudden silence, he asked God to give His blessing with the food
provided, and to send His Holy Spirit into the hearts of all present, so
that they might be made to hunger and thirst for Jesus, the Bread and
Water of Life.  Then the poor people had scarcely recovered from their
surprise at the brevity of the prayer, when they were again charmed to
silence by the sweet strains of the harmonium.  You see, they had not
yet become _blase_ and incapable of enjoying anything short of an organ.
Indeed, there were some among them who deliberately said they preferred
a harmonium to an organ!

But no instrument either of ancient or modern invention could drown the
clatter that ensued when enormous mugs of earthenware were distributed
to the company, by more or less rich and well-off "workers"; so the
clatter and the hymns went on together until each lung was filled with
some delectable fluid, smoking hot, and each mouth crammed with
excellent bread and meat.  Then comparative quiet ensued, during which
temporary calm Tom read a few verses of the Word of God, commenting on
them briefly in language so forcible that it went right home to many
hearts, yet so simple that even little Martha understood it.

True to her intention, little Martha, although much surprised and
charmed and perplexed by all that was going on around her, did not
forget to pocket something for gran'father.  She was met, however, by an
exasperating difficulty at the very outset.  Her pocket was not large
enough to contain the huge roll which, with some meat, had been put
hastily into her small hand by a lady with a red rose in her bonnet.  To
achieve her object with the roll and meat in one hand and the mug in the
other was, she found, impossible, so she set the mug on the floor
between her feet and proceeded to wrestle with the loaf and pocket,
having previously torn off a very small portion of the bread for her own
use.  Still the loaf was too large; so she tore off another morsel, and
finally, after a severe struggle, succeeded in getting it and the bit of
meat in.

"You'll go for to kick it over, if you don't mind," said a small boy
near her, referring to the mug.

"You mind your own business--Imperence!" replied Martha, sharply.  It
must be remembered that she was a child of the "slums."

"Wot a cheeky little shrimp it is," retorted the boy, with as much of a
grin as a stuffed mouth would admit of.

Just then Matilda Westlake, having finished a hymn, and being mindful of
the little toe, came quietly down to where Martha was sitting.

"Why, dear child," she said, in surprise, "have they not given you
something to eat?"

"Oh yes, ma'am.  But I've--"

She was going to say, "I've eaten it," but gran'father had so earnestly
impressed on her mind the sinfulness of telling lies, that she felt
constrained to hesitate, and, with a trembling lip, finished by saying
she had eaten _some_ of it.

"And what has become of the rest, dear?"

"Please, miss, she've putt it in 'er pocket," said "Imperence" promptly.

Without noticing the remark, Matty moved so as to make herself an
effectual screen between Imperence and Martha.

"Tell me, dear child," she said, stooping low and putting a gentle hand
on Martha's shoulder, "are you not hungry?"

"Oh yes," answered the little one quickly; "I'm so 'ungry.  You can't
think 'ow 'ungry; but I promised to--to--"

At this point her lip quivered, and she began to cry quietly.

"Stay, don't tell me anything more about it, dear, till you have
breakfasted.  Here, eat _this_ before you say another word."

She took a roll from the basket of a passing "worker" and put it in the
child's hand.  Nothing loth, Martha began to eat and drink, mingling a
warm tear or two with the hot soup, and venting a sob now and then as
she proceeded.

Watching her for a few moments, Matty left her.

In passing she stopped and said to Imperence, in a whisper of terrible
intensity, "If you speak to that girl again you shall have--_no more_."

No more!  To be "hanged by the neck till you are dead" would not have
sounded so appalling just at that time.  So Imperence collapsed.

It is not our purpose to go much further into the details of the feast.
Suffice it to say that the poorest of the poor were there; that they
were encouraged to eat as much as possible, and allowed to carry away
what they could not eat, and there is reason to believe that, judging
from the prominence of pockets, a considerable quantity found its way to
hungry mouths which had been found incapable of attending the feast.

Among those who did great execution in the pocketing line was, as you
may well believe, little Martha.  Finding, to her ineffable joy, that
there was no limit assigned to consumption, and that pocketing was not
esteemed a sin, she proceeded, after stuffing herself, to stuff to
overflowing the pocket with which she had previously wrestled, as
already described, and then attempted to fill the pocket on the other
side.  She did so in utter and child-like forgetfulness of the fact that
she had recently lost several small articles in consequence of the
condition of that pocket, and her memory was not awakened until, having
just completed the satisfactory filling of it, she beheld, or rather
felt, the entire mass of edibles descending to the floor, proving that
the pocket was indeed a very bottomless pit.

"Never mind, little one," said Tom Westlake, coming forward at the
moment, for he had just closed the meeting; "I'll find a bag for you to
put it in.  I hope the toe is all right."

"Oh yes, sir, thank you, it's quite well," answered Martha, blushing
through the dirt on her face, as she eyed the fallen food anxiously.

"Tell me now, little one," continued Tom, sitting down on the bench and
drawing the child gently towards him, "whom are you pocketing all these
good things for?--not for yourself, I'm quite sure of that."

"Oh dear, no, sir; it's for gran'father."

"Indeed.  Is grandfather very poor?"

"Oh yes, sir, very, _very_ poor; an' he's got nobody but me to take care
of him."

"If that be so, who is taking care of him just now?" asked Matty, who
had joined her brother, leaving another "worker" at the harmonium to
play the people out,--a difficult thing to do, by the way, for the
people seemed very unwilling to go.

You see, among other things, Jack Frost and Sons could gain no footing
in that hall, and the people knew only too well that the firm was in
great force awaiting them outside.

"Nobody's takin' care on 'im, ma'am," replied Martha, somewhat shyly.
"I locked 'im in, an' he's takin' care of hisself."

"Would you like to give grandfather anything in particular, little
woman, if a fairy were to offer to give it you?"

"Oh, wouldn't I just?"

"Yes?  What would you ask for?"

Martha pursed her little mouth and knitted her brows in thought for a
minute.  Then she said slowly, "I'd ask for a mug of hot soup, an' a
blanket, an' some coals, and--oh!  I forgot, a teapot, for ours is
cracked an' won't 'old in now."

"Do you live far from this hall?" asked Tom.

"No, sir, quite close."

"Come, Matty, you and I will go with this little one and see
grandfather.  What is your name, child?"

"Martha Burns, sir."

"Well, Martha, give me your hand, and come along."

They were soon in the shabby little room,--for Martha was eager to give
the food to the old man.  Of course Jack Frost and Sons were still in
possession, but there had come another visitor during the child's
absence, whom they were scarce prepared to meet.

Death sat beside the lowly bed.  He had not yet laid his hand on his
victim, but his chill presence was evidently felt.

"Darling, I'm glad you've come," said the old man, faintly.  "I've been
longing so for you.  Give me your hand, dear.  I'm so cold--so cold."

He shivered as he spoke until the miserable bed shook.  Poor Martha
forgot the food in her anxiety, for a striking change had come over
gran'father--such as she had never seen before.  She took his thin hand
in hers, and began to weep softly.

But Matilda Westlake did not forget the food.  She took up the tin can
in which it had been brought there, and poured some of the still warm
contents into a cracked soup plate that stood on the table.  Finding a
pewter spoon, she at once put her hand under the pillow, and raising the
old man's head gently, began to feed him like a child.  Meanwhile Tom
Westlake took off his thick overcoat and spread it over the bed.  Then
he went out, bought some sticks and coal from a neighbour, and,
returning, soon kindled a fire in the rusty grate.

The old man did not seem surprised.  His face wore a dazed, yet
thoroughly pleased, look as he quietly accepted these attentions.  All
the time he kept fast hold of Martha's hand, and smiled to her once or
twice.  It was evident that he relished the soup.  Only once he broke
silence to thank them and say, "Jesus sent you, I suppose?"

"Yes, Jesus sent us," replied Matty, thoroughly meaning what she said.

At that moment Death raised his hand and laid it gently on the old man's
brow.  The hoary head bowed to the summons, and, with a soft sigh, the
glad spirit fled to that region where suffering cannot enter.

Oh, it was sad to witness the child-grief when Martha at last came to
understand that gran'father was really gone.  And it required no little
persuasion to induce her to leave the lowly sordid room that she had
known as "home."

While his sister comforted the child, Tom went to the "authorities" to
inform them that an old pauper had gone the way of all flesh.

When at last Martha permitted her new friends to remove her, she was led
by Miss Westlake to the not far distant house of a lady friend, whose
sympathies with the suffering, the sorrowful, and the fallen were so
keen that she had given up all and gone to dwell in the midst of them,
in the sanguine hope of rescuing some.  To this lady's care Martha was
in the meantime committed, and then Tom and his sister went their way.

Their way led them to a very different scene not far from the same
region.

"We're rather late," remarked Tom, consulting his watch as they turned
into a narrow street.

"Not too late, I think," said his sister.

"I hope not, for I should be sorry to go in upon them at dinner-time."

They were not too late.  David Butts, whom they were about to visit, was
a dock-labourer.  In early youth he had been a footman, in which
capacity he had made the acquaintance of the Westlakes' nursery-maid,
and, having captivated her heart, had carried her off in triumph and
married her.

David had not been quite as steady as might have been desired.  He had
acquired, while in service, a liking for beer, which had degenerated
into a decided craving for brandy, so that he naturally came down in the
world, until, having lost one situation after another, he finally, with
his poor wife and numerous children, was reduced to a state bordering on
beggary.  But God, who never forgets His fallen creatures, came to this
man's help when the tide with him was at its lowest ebb.  A
humble-minded city missionary was sent to him.  He was the means of
bringing him to Jesus.  The Saviour, using one of the man's companions
as an instrument, brought him to a temperance meeting, and there an
eloquent, though uneducated, speaker flung out a rope to the struggling
man in the shape of a blue ribbon.  David Butts seized it, and held on
for life.  His wife gladly sewed a bit of it on every garment he
possessed--including his night-shirt--and the result was that he got to
be known at the docks as a steady, dependable man, and found pretty
constant employment.

How far Matilda Westlake was instrumental in this work of rescue we need
not stop to tell.  It is enough to say that she had a hand in it--for
her heart yearned towards the nurse, who had been very kind to her when
she was a little child.

Jack Frost and his sons, with their usual presumption, were in close
attendance on the Westlakes when they knocked at David's door, and when
it was opened they rudely brushed past the visitors and sought to enter,
but a gush of genial heat from a roaring fire effectually stopped Jack
and the major on the threshold, and almost killed them.  Colonel Wind,
however, succeeded in bursting in, overturning a few light articles,
causing the flames to sway, leap, and roar wildly, and scattering ashes
all over the room, but his triumph was short-lived.  The instant the
visitors entered he was locked out, and the door shut against him with a
bang.

"It do come rather awkward, sir, 'avin' no entrance 'all," said David,
as he made the door fast.  "If we even 'ad a porch it would 'elp to keep
the wind and snow hout, but I ain't complainin', sir.  I've on'y too
good reason to be thankful."

"Dear Miss Matilda," said the old nurse, dusting a wooden chair with her
apron, and beaming all over with joy, "it's good for sore eyes to see
you.  Don't mind the child'n, miss, an' do sit down near the fire.  I'm
sure your feet must be wet--such dreadful weather."

"No, indeed, nurse,--thank you," said Miss Westlake, laughing as she sat
down, "my feet are not a bit wet.  The frost is so hard that everything
is quite dry."

"Now it's no use to tell me that, Miss Matty," said Mrs Butts, with the
memory of nursing days strong upon her.  "You was always such a dear,
thoughtless child!  Don't you remember that day when you waded in baby's
bath, an' then said you wasn't wet a bit, only a _very_ little, an' you
rather liked it?  Indeed she did: you needn't laugh, Master Tom, I
remember it as well as if it happened yesterday."

"I don't in the least doubt you, Mrs Butts," said Tom, "I was only
laughing at my sister's idea of dryness.  But you must not let us
interrupt you in your cooking operations, else we will go away directly.
Just go about it as if we were not here, for I have some business
matters to talk over with your husband."

"Go away?" echoed Mrs Butts; "you must not talk of going away till
you've had a bite of lunch with us.  It's our dinner, you know, but
lawks! what do it matter what you calls it so long as you've got it to
eat?  An' there's such a splendid apple dumplin' in the pot, miss; you
see, it's Tommy's birthday, for he was born on a Christmas Day, an' he's
very fond of apple dumplin', is Tommy."

The six children, of various ages and sizes scattered about the small
room, betrayed lively interest in this invitation--some hoping that it
would be accepted; others as evidently hoping that it would be declined.
As for Tommy, his fear that the dumpling would be too small for the
occasion, filled his heart with anxiety that showed itself strongly in
his face, but he was promptly relieved by Miss Matty assuring his mother
that to stay was impossible, as they had other visits to pay that day.

Thus the lady and nurse chatted of past and present days, while Tom
Westlake talked "business" with the dock-labourer.

"You seem to be getting on pretty comfortably now," remarked Tom.

"Yes, sir, thank God I am.  Ever since I was enabled to cry, `God be
merciful to me a sinner,' things 'as gone well with me.  An' the puttin'
on o' the blue ribbon, sir, 'as done me a power o' good.  You see,
before that I was sorely tempted by comrades offerin' me a glass, and by
my own wish to _'ave_ a glass, but when I mounted the blue I was let
alone, though they chaffed me now an' then, an' I felt it was no use
thinkin' about it, 'owever much I might wish for it.  The missus, bless
'er 'art, sewed a bit o' blue on my night-shirt in fun, but d'ee know,
sir, I do believe it's that 'as cured me o' dreamin' about it, as I used
to do."

"I'm glad to hear that, Butts," said Tom, with a laugh.  "Now, tell me;
how long is it since you tasted strong drink?"

"Six months this very day, sir."

"And are you satisfied that you are better without it?"

"Better without it, sir," repeated Butts, with energy, "in course I am--
better in body and better in soul, also in pocket.  Of course you know,
sir, we don't carry on every day with such fires an' dinners as we're
a-goin' in for to-day--for Christmas on'y comes once a year, and
sometimes we've been slack at the docks, an' once or twice I've bin laid
up, so that we've bin pinched a bit now an' then, but we've bin able to
make the two ends meet, and the older child'n is beginnin' to turn in a
penny now an' again, so, you see, sir, though the fires ain't always
bright, an Jack Frost do manage to git in through the key 'ole rather
often just now, on the whole we're pretty comfortable."

"I'm glad to hear it, Butts; very glad to hear it indeed," said Tom,
"because I'm anxious to help you, and I make it a point only to help
those who help themselves.  Six months of steadiness goes a long way to
prove that your craving for drink has been cured, and that your
reformation is genuine; therefore, I am able now to offer you a
situation as porter in a bank, which for some time I have kept open on
purpose to be ready for you.  How will that suit you--eh?"

Whatever David Butts replied, or meant to reply, could only be gathered
from his gratified expression, for at that moment his voice was drowned
by a shriek of delight from the youngest children, in consequence of
Mrs Butts, at Matilda's request, having removed the lid of the pot
which held the dumpling, and let out a deliciously-scented cloud of
steam.  It was almost too much for the little ones, whose mouths watered
with anticipation, and who felt half inclined to lay violent hands on
the pot and begin dinner without delay.

"Now, I know by the smell that it is quite ready, so we will say
good-bye at once," said Matilda, getting up with a smile, and drawing
her warm cloak round her.  "Be sure to send your eldest girl to me
to-morrow along with your husband."

"And come early, Butts," said Tom Westlake, buttoning up his coat.

"You may depend on me, sir."

"Stand by to shut the door quickly after us," added Tom as he grasped
the handle, "else the wind will get in and blow the fire about."

The brother and sister, being young and active, were pretty smart in
making their exit, and David Butts, being used to doors, was not slow to
shut his own, but they could not altogether baffle the colonel, for he
was waiting outside.  Indeed, he had been whistling with furious
insolence through the keyhole all the time of the visit.  Sliding in
edgewise, at the moment of opening, he managed to scatter the ashes
again, and whirl about some of the light articles before he was fairly
expelled.

Thereafter, along with his father and brother, he went riotously after
Tom and Matilda Westlake, sometimes shrieking over their heads; now and
then dashing on in front, and, whirling round in an eddy, plunging
straight back into their faces, but they could make nothing of it.  The
brother and sister merely laughed at them, and defied them to do their
worst, even, in the joy of their hearts, going the length of saying to
several utter but beaming strangers, that it was "splendid Christmas
weather."  And so it was,--to the young and strong.  Not so, alas! to
the old and feeble.

It almost seemed as if Colonel Wind and Major Snow had taken offence at
this last sally, for about that time of the day they forsook their
father and left London--probably to visit the country.  At all events,
the clouds cleared away, the sky became blue, and the sun shone out
gloriously--though without perceptibly diminishing the frost.

After spending another hour or two in paying visits, during which they
passed abruptly, more than once, from poverty-stricken scenes of
moderate mirth to abodes of sickness and desolation, Tom and Matilda, by
means of 'bus and cab, at last found themselves in the neighbourhood of
the Serpentine.

"What say you to a turn on the ice, Matty?"

"Charming," cried Matty.

Society on the Serpentine, when frozen over, is not very select, but the
brother and sister were not particular on that point just then.  They
hired skates; they skimmed about over the well-swept surface; they
tripped over innumerable bits of stick or stone or orange-peel; they ran
into, or were run into by, various beings whose wrong-headedness induced
a preference for skating backwards.  In short, they conducted themselves
as people usually do on skates, and returned home pretty well exhausted
and blooming.

That evening, after a family dinner, at which a number of young cousins
and other relatives were present, Tom and his sister left the festive
circle round the fire, and retired to a glass conservatory opening out
of the drawing-room.  There was a sofa in it and there they found Ned
Westlake extended at full length.  He rose at once and made room for
them.

"Well, Ned, how have you enjoyed yourself to-day?" asked Tom.

"Oh, splendidly!  There was such a jolly party in Wharton's grounds--
most of them able to skate splendidly.  The pond is so sheltered that
the wind scarcely affected us, and a staff of sweepers cleared away the
snow as fast as it fell.  Afterwards, when it cleared up and the sun
shone through the trees, it was absolutely magnificent.  It's the
jolliest day I've had on the ice for years, though I'm almost knocked up
by it.  Jovially fatigued, in fact.  But where have you been?"

"We also have been skating," said Matilda.

"Indeed!  I thought you had intended to spend the day somewhere in the
east-end attending some of those free breakfasts, and visiting the poor,
or something of that sort--as if there were not enough of city
missionaries, and sisters of mercy, or charity, or whatever you call
them, to look after such things."

"You are right, Ned," said Tom, "such was our intention, and we carried
it out too.  It was only at the end of the day that we took to skating
on the Serpentine, and, considering the number of people we have run
into, or overturned, or tumbled over, we found a couple of hours of it
quite sufficient."

From this point Tom Westlake "harked back" and related his experiences
of the day.  He possessed considerable power of graphic delineation, and
gradually aroused the interest of his gay and volatile but
kindly-disposed brother.

"Ned," said he, at last, "do you really believe in the truth of these
words, `Blessed are they that consider the poor?'"

"Yes, Tom, I do," replied Ned, becoming suddenly serious.

What Tom said to his brother after that we will not relate, but the
result was that, before that Christmas evening closed, he succeeded in
convincing Ned that a day of "jolly good fun" may be rendered
inexpressibly more "jolly," by being commenced with an effort to cheer
and lighten the lot of those into whose sad lives there enter but a
small amount of jollity and far too little fun.


STORY THREE, CHAPTER 1.

A DOUBLE RESCUE--INTRODUCTION.

It is a curious and interesting fact that Christmas-tide seemed to have
a peculiar influence on the prospects of our hero Jack Matterby, all
through his life.  All the chief events of his career, somehow, happened
on or about Christmas Day.

Jack was born, to begin with, on a Christmas morning.  His father, who
was a farmer in the middle ranks of life, rejoiced in the fact,
esteeming it full of promise for the future.  So did his mother.  Jack
himself did not at first seem to have any particular feeling on the
subject.  There are deaths, but not in that number. - No deaths are known,
are called _casos_ - replied with a stupid laugh Tables -. And it
may be true that your Parenting says, but I know that last night Gregorio
Tinajas and I drank a cup together, leaving some part, and I know that
I've seen just now stiff and cold. - Has been killed !

- Maricadalso exclaimed with horror. - As my grandfather. Do you feel -
because Dígolo and paid all together. - Was also dead _Fraila_.

Nazario closed his eyes, unable to close their ears. But the athlete went
to Maricadalso and mug shot to mouth these words: - And your
daughter, Maricadalso, Ildefons your daughter would now have a
pitcher of water on the streets of the Dove, and fell in the street,
saying that he died .... - My daughter!

... You lied .... Corro see .... interrupted saying this with roars,
Maricadalso jumped from his seat as azorica cat, and left to escape.

Oyéronse extinguish their violent steps on the ladder, as it turns off
the sound of crashing and banging rock that falls into the abyss. - Rumalda
- said looking at the tables just cojuela climb after the store
closed -; get me down and snuff. - Romualda fell, and his footsteps
slow and weary resounded for a long time in the stairwell.

Tables continued listing after the sick and dead, and again to wipe
the sweat. The heat was sweltering. The room, not well-tempered by the
darkness like a furnace by the proximity of the roof, where it
fell as rain of fire the burning sun of July.

Began to fall afternoon, and the heat seemed to increase at that time
because of the fumes soil that had emerged.

In still air gave no comfort to the lungs, and only flies seemed to
rejoice in the heavy atmosphere and miasmatic as gourmet living
in half of all the delights that nature might desire.

Gracián rebuked with some asperity in their quest Pedro López Funeral
to news that afflicted the poor and sick diminished. Echos laugh at the
barbaric, saying he was not afraid to _los cóleras_ or death of any
kind.

Then spoke of what motivated the visit Gracián. - I got notice of the
referral of Catalonia an assignment that interests me so much - he
said that getting a letter -. I say pick up the package .... it is
like a sack of half bushel, Mr. López ... Dragon in the inn. He
spent several warnings, and my order does not appear. Mr. Lopez,
will you do me a favor and look good in the store to ask for regular
and muleteers to do, in order, as his party is to make it appear
that package? - Is it fruit? -- No, sir. - Hams - Nor. It is something
of little value in itself, but I think in a lot. It is a sack full of
earth. Perfectly willing to come and rolling on mats. - Oh ... Earth
metals will be clean. - I'll pay twice the size if it looks intact and
is - said the Reverend rising. - Parenting Is not received your
last year as the other bag through D.

Felicísimo - Precisely. Manresa's parents recorded what Mr Felicísimo.
And you, Mr. Lopez, I took him to my house. - Well, take this as well.
- Thank you. Come on, Sancho. This name, applied to subdiácono, took a
moment to look somewhat quixotic father Gracian. But that name is not
the narrator's whim. Indeed called subdiácono Jose Sancho; was from
Palma de Mallorca, and twenty-four was seven years old and Company. Gracián
tried consoling words to encourage Nazario, urging them to discard
their unfounded fear, and after reiterating the plea to Tables it did
shortly before left the house escorted by flies. approached the
Imperial College, where a vile Pillet intemperate who scratched
a guitar, he was ahead, step cutting, and voice that had more of
that infernal human sang this couplet: Muera Christ Luzbel alive!

Muera D. Carlos, Isabel alive! Apart gently Jesuit and the singer
continued. But Sancho was more expressive, and pushed the pillastre,
expelled from the curb violence.

Instantly received a blow to the shoulder with the guitar. The two
were found face looking through the eyes of anger.

Perhaps it would have continued the conflict, if not read Gracián voice
reposada - Sancho, what is that? Both entered the College. At the door
oíase a rugidillo no child being left to be insolent. The rumor seemed
a little small rabble that usually creped in the squares of vegetables,
and that the authority knows that contain no more artillery municipal
brooms.

XXVI-In-faculty find grace to Father Francisco Sauri, good subject
Catalan minister and attorney general of the seminar. He was 39 years
and was already 17 Company. His zeal for the glory of the house was
special.

Gracian Refiriole what he had heard singing in the door, and Sauri told
him that day had received the mysterious guiding various warnings,
some threatening, others recommended precautions. Professor of Ethics
did not give importance to the fact that other times had arrived at the
house chilling anonymous, but nothing happens after them in particular.
Visited him in his cell later Father Artigas, librarian, and spoke of
the war, after reading many letters and papers. After the refectory
was much of the anonymous voices of the running, a little flattering
for regular, cholera and other recent zarandajas. Somewhat later the
Collegiate sleep with the sweet peace of the children, and
parents or sleeping or did penance in their cells.

Without fear of error could have been spent ensuring that through the
night in appalling austerities just rush him.

The _inescobata cellula_, had lost no small amount of that _humus manresianus_
cover their soil, but Gracian was pleased to receive the new shipment and
that abundant dust the next day to Mr. Tables recommendation that our
readers know. Ocupábase that morning, after the kind of ethics, to
extend the soil of the land, when he announced the visit of Mr Benigno
Cordero. Made into suspending its work. The folk hero and the Jesuit was
affectionately squeezed his hands. - Come - Lamb said, laughing - which
may well enter the plow in the cell you .... This is a field. - The
trees that are not born here - the Jesuit replied severely cutting
the jokes -.

Come on. I know what's coming to you .... sorry to say that there is
nothing. - No news - None. Cordero closed beak and pressed lips. - In
particular - he said -. Since I sent the power to marry ... (and
was dated April 15), we have not had more news .... Here you have
me as much anxiety. I married another .... I am a husband of formula,
a proceedings husband and I have to address the genuine husband
more than I wanted.

The wife of my friend ... which gave me his hand, as you might marry
me marry a document is too large .... anxiety. - There is no more
news - Gracian said - that the other day.

I write Zorraquín dated 14 and said he had separated from the friend,
because he (Zorraquín) was requested by the militant Carlism to
occupy a place that was much needed in the ranks of Zumalacárregui,
chaplain of the square or spiritual director.

It is possible that after Zorraquín divorced, did not have this man
safe to send their letters to Madrid, which previously had been
through this honorable priest.

Hopefully. Cordero gave a sigh, saying: - Tranquilizaré as possible
to my lady friend.

And since I'm not leaving here without warning you of certain rumors ....
- Ah! We have received anonymous threatening letters. It is the twentieth
time. - No, I think this is something very important - said giving
it to the hero himself greatly -.

However, it is the most preventable, because people know where jokes begin
... but never know where or how it ended up. cleric was a moment of
disdainful, saying little of what we deal Cordero said. This went well
- I have a cousin who called Primitivo Cordero, which if the treaty is
not fair, but the apple is nonsense, I mean that is one of those
politicians who are caught with four words a bad book idea that
half of them hit any of our great men, no small portion of some
grains of envy and misguided patriotism, entertain castles to
manufacture wind, founding institutions, dictating laws, moving
people.

I always thought my cousin as harmless as a dove, but those around him
are not. As the butterfly is driven by a secret fire of burning desire,
my cousin, Primitive is drawn to the clubs by an unhappy itching bullanga
that it may more than the reason, if reason is that inside of that
head.

Well, Friend and Father: for my cousin and blessed by one Rufete
that my cousin would be equal if not more exaggerated, more empty
pate and worst intentions, I know that in a semi-secret meeting
that several patriots have in the Square San Javier have agreed to
give a scare to Your Paternity.

In saying this, he looked carefully Lamb by surprise on her face the
fact that this statement will cause, but not the face of the
Jesuit said nothing.

It was an expensive suit. - We will shock patience - Father Gracian
said, giving the hero a powder, which are incapable of Manresa, D.
gladly accepted Benigno. - In my report added that - and reports
are true, from the same furnace where these cakes are baked, the
joke, or as we like to call it shock, do not go higher.

The Patriots just want to express their antipathy to Your Reverence and
protest of the protection that you are bowing to Carlism.

It is true that such protection exists for the same kind of things
and the background of individuals.

Done! Logical imperative overwhelming! It is also true that the liberal
regime can not coexist with Carlism, where antagonism is an imposing two
events came between two truths .... between - and you do not have
anything to God - Gracian said, with disdain. - Yeah, I count on
him, and he hope that what is advertised will be nothing for the
benefit of all.

But someday, Lord and Father, must be such as San Quentin, or Your
Reverence leave it to cover Carlists or absorb Carlists liberalism,
or liberalism to swallow them and Parenting Your Reverend. --
Large-mouth has a need ... lack of appetite but not leave - said
Gracián deigned to smile a little.

Cordero gave a sigh and said: - We'll see who eats whom .... I repeat
that the news given to me and my cousin Rufetillo ... I always call
him Rufetillo ... not spooky.

No more yelling and noise .... You may have some sticks, but these do
not fall on the ribs of any church. If you are unhappy that some do
not eat nor drink. At that meeting no secret of great men thrust
conspirators or fearsome or Jacobins of existing ties. The more of them
entangled, the viborezno D.

Eugenio Aviraneta has mysteriously disappeared, when it seemed more engaged
in their intrigues. And now they say that is with the Carlists. Gracián
lifted a step-papers on the table at his desk several letters oppressed.
That object was the shape of a foot asshole, and having come unscathed
from the rubble of the house of D. Felicísimo, it gave the father Pipaón
Gracian amantísimo in memory of his stepfather, who was a close friend
of the Jesuit. This looked at the letter under the foot of bastard was
and said: - Aviraneta came to Toulouse in France. I write 13 to
date. You see that you will trust my secrets. - And you know that I
am a tomb Reverence - Lamb replied rising -. Congratulations and a
few scares. Despidiose and went to see Genara, hoping to find the news
that his house was unable or unwilling to give thanks. The lady was
preparing to pack their bags and flee from Madrid that the epidemic
began to spread horrific panic among the inhabitants of the Villa. Lamb
of reports that sought nothing could give Genara, because nothing
was known after the departure of her husband's sick and demented
military hospital in Pamplona.

The lady did not think more than flee, flee from that scourge of God
who had begun hurting the poor and soon discharged on the rich. Already
there were cases, yes, there were cases of people off. A retired
counselor, Mrs.

Mayor of a Court, without a guard, a postal officer and a poet had fallen
the previous day .... Blessed be God! the non-poor had at least the
appeal of the leak, if the anger was not with them, unseen, at the
rear of the car, as it used to happen.

Genara was so scared to death, a sign of troubled consciousness, but
she tried to appear calm and animábase with their smiles, as the cowardly
soldier with his own bravado. Went, came, collecting clothes, filling
trunks, making and breaking packages, dictating orders, counting money
orders and pointing. Answered shortly and coldly to D.

Benign, but when he spoke of his marriage formula by the power of a missing
boyfriend, turned to him with sudden impulse and said: - Why do not you
looked for me godmother ... No, I do not keep grudges. I want to forgive
and forgive me .... So hands up to one hundred miles through is not
in my books .... What a marriage as unhappy, D.

Benigno! God does not want the anger over a separate husband and wife.
- Sir, for God's sake! ... - Do not you think that is bad intention.
It is the opposite .... I wish them every happiness. Do not believe you
I'm bad .... And now that being in mortal sin is so dangerous! ... No,
no, reconciliation, mercy, forgiveness, love for all good conscience,
that's my issue. Is it true that many people died last night -
Much, "said Cordero looking pale fear that painting in the face of
Genara graceful. I tell you .... This afternoon I'm leaving. I confess
first. Do not you think it's a good idea - I feel quite good. - Live
almost a miracle. - It's true. Because we take, we take confessed -
Lamb said with some sarcasm. - Yeah, yeah .... Peace with the whole
world, peace with God .... Spoke these words with great
anxiety, and followed up with feverish activity in their travel
arrangements.

The objects will be dropped from the hands, one wrong thing with another;
clothes should be packed in the house, and placed under the most vital
keys for the trip. They were coming one after the other friends, news of
your journey. Saw the beginning with feeling, and she in turn left
them with sadness, because the gathering was the charm of his life, and
talk of things government comidilla the most gifted of his mischievous
spirit. Name those gentlemen? Better not, because some have lived
until recently, most have held high posts, and all led, which
over which less rock and rubble at the building of a party as powerful
as unpopular. As nothing is lasting in the world, the sky wanted to
that building as he arrived at the house of D.

Felicísimo its final days, and now grows in its _amarillo jaramago_ the
broken walls, and voids _son Woe! lizard vile morada_. Then, in
a large green Martínez de la Rosa, was seeing the joy of a thriving
youth party is now decrepit old geezer with pity claims go right,
speak and even to instill some fear . Then nourished from skilled rhetorical
scholarship doctrinarian Carlist, and was fencing with the sword
arm and quarrelsome Valenton Grenadians of young officers.

In the heart of this party that once was called _los sabios_ in its infancy
and was called the _anilleros_, there were people of great merit,
chastened about the practice in sterile liberalism, something other
trainer in the political art lacking the Liberals.

They were the first Machiavellian who succumbed to the angelic innocence
of those who start to candid doceañistas not serve at all.

A lack of principles had a system, consisting of deception and power. His
political creed was a comedy of forty years. Its success debiose to have
invigorated the principle of authority, and his unpopular or
discredited to have prevented the progressive development of ideas.

In Voltairian religion were, in their customs and private enemies of
temperance, but had a _coram vobis_ of santurronería making the effect
of seeing the figure of Satan in the shadow of a confessional.

One of the first elements of strength that was close to the clergy,
whom he flattered, provided, however, for little money to buy their
property, when the progressives who pulled out of the hands called
dead. Except for two or three individuals of spotless purity, were
people of economies, and in time, with purchases of goods desamortizados
formed an aristocracy that gradually became respectable, and in which
there are many and formidable element marquises of order. In the military
were unscrupulous, and have been seen to act naturally and gracefully.
In the days of our story had the pleasing appearance of a young army,
full of vigor and courage. Its program of restraint contrary to
many people.

That system should be skillful and not be balanced between absolutism
and liberals, using each other, and promise not comply, to cover
up with formulas, and rhetorical dicharachos now discredited, but
then much in vogue, the loop and Espadon arbitrariness of force
resulted in the time of such political innocence when freedom was
like a child and not without generous mimes, easier to fool than
convincing.

Genara The gathering was in the center where aspirations that people
list began to take shape.

There was precisely the system and taking practical. There were
relationships that were not broken but with death and became known and
were chosen, let us say, men. Young people took the old wisdom and
cunning of those on these desenfado and vigor. Humanly considered,
those people had a superiority that has been special because of its
dominance over one third of a century: it was the superiority of
manners, something very important in our age.

There was at that time as a clear and precise in separating the two
halves immense political staff, created by revolutions. In the course
of this line had some scissors tailors. There was average, and it was
great pity that so many generous and ideas for saving could not fatal
destiny, emancipated from rudeness, bad dress and speak less.

That's why the advent of the middle class was a tedious and cumbersome.
Aquella class frailunamente educated, did not miss it some harshness, so
only prevailed in public life, the few who knew how to wear the tuxedo.
Genara off that day, July 16, 1834, and all were withdrawn, one to his
office, as almost all were employed, the other a nap.

In those days was still sleeping the siesta, and the day following that
July 16 is when the government ordered the Providence sleep a
siesta famous.

The lady left full of pity and fear, fear that if ignored will divert away
from Madrid poisonous air; penalty because his life gave candy and
gifts, their gatherings full of pleasantness or interest, its
influence in the dominant party, and perhaps, perhaps more keenly
interested in your heart.

Renounce the brightness of his wit and beauty, to the adulation of the
small court that the men celebrated a day and another day, giving
the crown and flee the capital of his kingdom of gallantry to be
buried in a rustic lugarón where they had to have that reads more
comfort and tasteless where he received the very sad news to her
husband, was a hard thing to heart flattering impressions friend,
always a fantasy for young dreamer and always for an alarmed
conscience.

She already finished for us . Within the limits to these stories, it
is already the rest of your life full of accidents, and not taken by the
model cenobitical or who intend to be saints or something that
looks like saints.

Only shall we, who lived many years in the sixties and that was
still pretty.

Witty, kind and somewhat intriguing, it was not until the seventies,
and for two years was a model of Christian devotion and uplifting
dealing with clergy and guilds, that God wanted to take this world.

Do not you lost the house over to D. Felicísimo but died suddenly
towards the last third of 68, if not wrong chronicles.

On that day (we return to our July 16 from 34), D. Clement was the last
thing he squeezed her hand. After the hero took a stroll through
the streets of Toledo and the plazuela Barley, because he had heard
stirring in those neighborhoods and loved to browse. A horrible spectacle
arrested him in his outing. Was cruelly murdered by a boy hush in
the vats of Aguadores. This mischief frequent then, commonly pescozones
punished. Things had changed, and the angels were treated like naughty
my great criminals.

Cordero declined to enter the street from the Duke of Alba, and in
the study received a testarazo it did jump from the sidewalk to the
stream. The hard object embistió it was a coffin. One man was wearing on
his head, beating a handful of passers-by found their way. - Beast! -
Lamb shouted.

At a point acknowledged Tables, and softening the voice asked: -
Who is it, brother?

- For one, for that - Lopez replied without stopping the pass. Lamb saw
some women crying.

Desgreñada-XXVII-, livid, his eyes sparkling with fury, his hands
trembling, stiff fingers and put forward the way of knives, dry
mouth, because the voices that came out of it rather embers that
words, more like a female devil woman, Maricadalso was at the door
of a house humildísima the street from the Rock.

Screams began to alarm across the street, as the chimes of a fire,
and windows and doors appeared neighbors.

How and what to look expensive! The shout of Maricadalso was
pitiful and painful at times, sometimes menacing and delirious.

Loose its terms, leaving the mouth sparks violent, do not fall under
the jurisdiction of the written language, because the characteristic
of them to stop being separated from what rude.

Words were those that qualify and salpimentan disputes popular
sinister brightness equivalent to the knife in the air and the
splash of blood between the foul filth that come out of a tough
heart thirsts for a mouth injury.

Between what they can not reproduce these phrases highlighted .--
My daughter dead!

... ¡Bad things in the water!

... Those crooks! ... Many ladies lamp, a remnant of which degrades
immortalized D. Ramon de la Cruz, surrounded Maricadalso. A harpy
screaming through the streets of the Rock or any of those other
neighborhoods, safety has lead to the conviction deeper mood of
his audience, especially if what you say is nonsense of those that
do not fall ever discrete head.

With magic speed, all the women surrounding Maricadalso is assimilated
the views and feelings of this. The people are wonderful conductor of
good and bad ideas, and when one of these falls well in it, and
beats him completely invaded by mass. Soon the individual was a harpy
harpy collectively, a gruesome monster who occupied the street and had
four hands to two hundred mouths to threaten and say bad things _ in
the water!

_ Those who do not ever think, agrees with glee thinking strange,
mostly if it is a terrifying thought so great, again for the
absurd. That day there had been many deaths. Several families were
in his house a dead or dying. In the presence of a huge disaster or
misfortune, the people do not naturally occur in what he sees and
suffers.
But what could these do to help him?  Were
not the streets swarming with such boys?

And in truth Jack Matterby was a very pitiable object, at least
according to the report of shop-mirrors, which told him that his face
was discoloured and bloody, his coat indescribably dirty and ragged,
besides being out of harmony with his trousers, and that his person
generally was bedaubed with mud.  Hunger at last induced him to overcome
his feelings of shame so far that he entered a baker's shop, but he was
promptly ordered to be off.  Later in the day he entered another shop,
the owner of which seemed to be of a better disposition.  Changing his
shilling, he purchased a penny roll, with which he retired to a dark
passage and dined.

When night came on he expended another penny and supped, after which he
sought for some place of shelter in which to sleep.  But wherever he
went he found the guardians of the public requiring him to "move on."
Several street arabs sought to make his acquaintance, but, with the
memory of Bob Snobbins strong upon him, he declined their friendship.
At last, wearied out and broken-hearted, he found a quiet corner under
an archway, where he sat down and leaned his head against the wall,
exclaiming, "I'm lost--lost!"  Then he wept quietly, and sought to find
temporary relief in slumber.

He was indeed lost, and more completely so, in the feeling of lonely
isolation, perhaps, than he would have been if lost in the backwoods of
America.  Yet he was not utterly lost, for the tender Shepherd was on
his track.  Some such thought seemed to cross his mind; for he suddenly
began to pray, and thoughts about the old home in Blackby, and of the
Grove family, comforted him a little until he fell asleep on his hard
bed.

But, for the time being, the poor boy _was_ lost--lost in London!  His
disreputable face and discreditable coat argued a dissipated character--
hence no one would employ him.  Ere long necessity compelled him to
accept the society of street arabs, and soon he became quite as sharp,
though not quite as wicked, as they.  But day by day he sank lower and
lower, and evil at which he would have shuddered at first became at last
familiar.

He did not sink without a struggle, however, and he would have returned
to the place where his mother had died, to ask help of the young surgeon
who had expressed sympathy with him, but, with the carelessness of
boyhood, he had forgotten the name of the hospital, and did not know
where, in the great wilderness of bricks and mortar, to search for it.
As for the home from which he had fled, the memory of the landlord still
kept him carefully clear of that.

But Jack's mother was _not_ dead!  In hospitals--as in the best of
well-regulated families--mistakes will sometimes happen.  The report
which had proved so disastrous to our poor hero referred to another
woman who had died.  A messenger had been at once sent, by the young
surgeon before mentioned, to tell Jack of the error; but when the
messenger arrived the boy had flown--as already described.  Indeed, it
was he whom Jack had passed on the stair.

It was long before Mrs Matterby recovered, for the disappearance of her
boy caused a relapse; and when at last she left the hospital, feeble and
homeless, she went about for many months, searching at once for work and
for her lost treasure.

Christmas came again, and found Jack Matterby at nearly the lowest point
in his downward career.  It is due to him to say, however, that he had
not up to that time, been guilty of any criminal act that could bring
him with the grasp of human law; but in word and deed he had begun, more
and more, to break the law of God: so that if poor Mrs Matterby had at
that time succeeded in finding her son, it is probable that her joy
would have been overwhelmed with terrible grief.

It was not exactly Christmas morning, but it was the Christmas season of
the year, when our little hero, wearied in spirit and body with the hard
struggle for life, sauntered down the now familiar Strand in the hope of
finding some odd job to do.  He paused before a confectioner's shop,
and, being very hungry, was debating with himself the propriety of
giving up the struggle, and coolly helping himself to a pie!  You may be
sure that bad invisible spirits were at his elbow just then to encourage
him.  But God sent a good angel also, and she was visible--being in the
form of a thin little old lady.

"You'd like a bun, I know," she said, putting a penny into Jack's hand.

"God bless you, ma'am--yes," burst from the astonished boy.

"Go in and buy one.  Then, come and tell me all about you."

The thin little old lady was one of those followers of the Lamb who do
not wait for Christmas to unlock their sympathies.  The river of her
love and pity was _always_ overflowing, so that there was no room for
increase to a deluge at Christmas time--though she rejoiced to note the
increase in the case of others, and wished that the flood might become
perennial.  To this lady Jack laid bare his inmost heart, and she led
him back to the Saviour.

"Now, Jack, let me ask you one question," she said; "would you like to
go to Canada?"

With tremendous energy Jack answered, "_Wouldn't_ I!"

"Then," said the old lady, "to Canada you shall go."


STORY THREE, CHAPTER 3.

THE DOUBLE RESCUE.

And Jack Matterby went!  But before he went he had to go through a
preliminary training, for his regular schooling had ceased when his
father died, and he had learned no trade.

In those days there were no splendid institutions for waifs and strays
such as now exist, but it must not be supposed that there was no such
thing as "hasting to the rescue."  Thin little old Mrs Seaford had
struck out the idea for herself, and had acted on it for some years in
her own vigorous way.  She took Jack home, and lodged him in her own
house with two or three other boys of the same stamp--waifs.  Jack
elected to learn the trade of a carpenter, and Mrs Seaford, finding
that he had been pretty well grounded in English, taught him French, as
that language, she told him, was much spoken in Canada.  Above all, she
taught him those principles of God's law without which a human being is
but poorly furnished even for the life that now is, to say nothing of
that which is to come.

In a few months Jack was ready for exportation!  A few months more, and
he found himself apprenticed to a farmer, not far from the shores of
that mighty fresh-water sea, Ontario.  Time passed, and Jack Matterby
became a trusted servant and a thorough farmer.  He also became a big,
dashing, and earnest boy.  More time passed, and Jack became a handsome
young man, the bosom friend of his employer.  Yet a little more time
winged its silent way, and Jack became John Matterby, Esquire, of Fair
Creek Farm, heir to his former master's property, and one of the
wealthiest men of the province--not a common experience of poor emigrant
waifs, doubtless, but, on the other hand, by no means unprecedented.

It must not be supposed that during all those years Jack forgot the
scenes and people of the old land.  On the contrary, the longer he
absented himself from the old home the more firmly and tenderly did the
old memories cling and cluster round his heart; and many a story and
anecdote did he relate about these, especially during the Christmas
season of each year, to his old master and to Nancy Briggs, in the log
homestead of Ontario.

Nancy was a waif, who had been sent out by the same thin little old lady
who had sent Jack out.  She was very pretty, and possessed of
delightfully amiable domestic qualities.  She grew up to be a very
handsome girl, and was a very bright sunbeam in the homestead.  But Jack
did not fall in love with her.  All unknown to himself his heart was
pre-occupied.  Neither did Nancy fall in love with Jack.  All
unwittingly she was reserving herself for another lot.  Of course our
hero corresponded diligently with the thin little old lady, and
gladdened her heart by showing and expressing strong sympathy with the
waifs of the great city; more than once, in his earlier letters,
mentioning one named Bob Snobbins, about whose fate he felt some
curiosity, but in regard to whose home, if such existed, he could give
no information.

Twice during those years Jack also wrote to the Grove family; but as he
received no answer on either occasion, he concluded that the father must
have been drowned, that old Nell was dead, and the family broken up.
Need we add that the memory of his dear mother never faded or grew dim?
But this was a sacred memory, in regard to which he opened his lips to
no one.

At last there came a day when John Matterby, being in the prime of life,
with ample means and time to spare, set his heart on a holiday and a
visit to the old country--the thin little old lady being yet alive.  It
was not so easy, however, for our hero to get away from home as one
might imagine; for, besides being a farmer, he was manager of a branch
bank, secretary to several philanthropic societies, superintendent of a
Sunday-school, and, generally, a helper of, and sympathiser with, all
who loved the Lord and sought to benefit their fellow-men.  But, being a
man of resolution, he cut the cords that attached him to these things,
appointed Miss Briggs to superintend the Sunday-school in his absence,
and set sail for England--not in a steamer, as most rich men would have
done, but in a sailing ship, because the vessel happened to be bound for
the port of Blackby, the home of his childhood.

It was winter when he set sail, and the storms of winter were having
high jinks and revels on the deep in the usual way at that season of the
year.  Jack's vessel weathered them all till it reached the shores of
old England.  Then the storm-fiend broke loose with unwonted fury, and,
as if out of spite, cast the good ship on the rocks lying a little to
the eastward of the port of Blackby.

It was a tremendous storm!  The oldest inhabitant of Blackby said, as
well as his toothless gums would let him, that, "it wos the wust gale as
had blow'd since he wos a leetle booy--an' that warn't yesterday--no,
nor yet the day before!"

The gale was at its height, in the grey of early morning, when the ship
struck, and all the manhood of the port and neighbouring village were
out to render aid, if possible, and to gaze and sympathise.  But who
could render aid to a vessel which was rolling on those black rocks in a
caldron of white foam, with a hundred yards of swirling breakers that
raged and roared like a thousand lions between it and the base of the
cliffs?  Even the noble lifeboat would have been useless in such a
place.  But hark! a cry is raised--the coastguardmen and the rocket!
Yes, there is one hope for them yet--under God.  Far below the men are
seen staggering along over the shingle, with their life-saving apparatus
in a hand-cart.

Soon the tripod is set up, and the rocket is fired, but the line falls
to leeward.  Another is tried; it falls short.  Still another--it goes
far to windward.  Again and again they try, but without success, until
all their rockets are expended.  But these bold men of the coastguard
are not often or easily foiled.  They send for more rockets to the next
station.  Meanwhile the terrible waves are doing their awful work,
dashing the ship on the rocks as if she were a mere toy--as indeed she
is, in their grasp.  Can nothing be done?

"She'll never hold together till the rockets come," said a young seaman
stepping out from the crowd.  "Here, let me have the line, and stand by
to pay out."

"Don't try it, lad, it'll be your death."

The youth paid no regard to this advice.  "A man can only die once," he
remarked in a low voice, more as if speaking to himself than replying to
the caution, while he quickly tied the end of the light rope round his
waist and dashed into the sea.

Oh! it is grand and heart-stirring to see a stalwart youth imperilling
life and limb for the sake of others; to see a powerful swimmer
breasting the billows with a fixed purpose to do or die.  But it is
terrible and spirit-crushing to see such a one tossed by the breakers as
if he were a mere baby, and hurled back helpless on the sand.  Twice did
the young sailor dash in, and twice was he caught up like a cork and
hurled back, while the people on shore, finding their remonstrances
useless, began to talk of using force.

The man's object was to dive _through_ the first wave.  If he could
manage this--and the second--the rest would not be beyond the power of a
strong man.  A third time he leaped into the rushing flood, and this
time was successful.  Soon he stood panting on the deck of the stranded
vessel, almost unable to stand, and well he knew that there was not a
moment to lose, for the ship was going to pieces!  Jack Matterby,
however, knew well what to do.  He drew out the hawser of the rocket
apparatus, fixed the various ropes, and signalled to those on shore to
send out the sling life-buoy, and then the men of the coastguard began
to haul the passengers and crew ashore, one at a time.

The young sailor, recovering in a few minutes, lent a hand.  Jack knew
him the instant he heard his voice, but took no notice of him, for it
was a stern matter of life or death with them all just then.

When Jack and the captain stood at last awaiting their turn, and
watching the last of the crew being dragged over the boiling surf, our
hero turned suddenly, and, grasping the young sailor's hand with the
grip of a vice, said, "God bless you, Natty Grove!"

Nat gazed as if he had been stunned.  "_Can_ it be?" he exclaimed.  "We
had thought you dead years ago!"

"Thank God, I'm not only alive but hearty.  Here comes the life-buoy.
Your turn next.  But one word before--old Nell; and--Nellie?"

"Both well, and living with your mother--"

"My--" Jack could not speak, a tremendous shock seemed to rend his
heart.  Young Grove felt that he had been too precipitate.

"Your mother is alive, Jack, and--"

He stopped, for the captain said quickly, "Now, then, get in.  No time
to lose."

But Jack could not get in.  If he had not been a strong man he must have
fallen on the deck.  As it was, he felt stunned and helpless.

"Here, captain," cried Nat Grove, leaping into the life-buoy, "lift him
into my arms.  The ropes are strong enough for both."

Scarce knowing what he did, Jack allowed himself to be half-lifted into
the buoy, in which his old friend held him fast.  A few minutes more,
and they were dragged safely to land and the ringing cheers and
congratulations of the assembled multitude.  The captain came last, so
that, when the ship finally went to pieces, not a human life was lost--
even the ship's cat was among the number of the saved, the captain
having carried it ashore in his arms.

Now, there are some scenes in this life which will not bear description
in detail.  Such was the meeting of our hero with his long-lost mother.
We refrain from lifting the curtain here.  But there is no reason why we
should not re-introduce the joyful and grateful pair at a later period
of that same eventful day, when, seated together by the bedside of old
Nell, they recounted their experiences--yes, the same old woman, but
thinner and wrinkleder, and smaller in every way; and the same bed, as
far as appearance went, though softer and cosier, and bigger in all
ways.  On the other side of the bed sat the manly form of Natty Grove.
Ate little. Do not read anything, and throwing his only distraction
was the foil to his brother. But this entertainment lasted just minutes,
the low strength of the convalescent. He spoke so little, sometimes even
denied what is necessary for not asking. In the space of a month
long failed rolls of three talks that the two brothers argued.

The first spoke of the conditions of the homes in Pamplona, the Cathedral,
the Citadel, the fortifications of Rochapea and other local issues,
where Navarro showed his prolific knowledge of the city.

In the second, Salvador told of the war, trying to test the trial of
his brother, and had no little surprise to note that Garrote
discussed the matter with a poise and serenity of an admirable ideas.

The third symposium was expressing his personal feelings, and could
serve as a basis of harmony between two men who had hated so much.

He must be placed among the most precious of our people who have talked
and played with integrity to be building our readers, as was Mrs.
Hermenegildo, who was honored to be present at that Smalltalk. A
late-XXI - after eating, were both ardent praise of a very
delicious stew of wild pigeons which made Mrs. Hermenegildo.
"Now, Jack," resumed the widow for the fiftieth time, "you must know
that after I lost you, and had given you up for dead, I came back here,
feeling an intense longing to see once more the old home, and I began a
school.  In course of years God sent me prosperity, notwithstanding the
murmurings of rebellion which rose in my heart when I thought of _you_.
The school became so big that I had to take a new house--that in which
you now sit--and sought about for a teacher to help me.  Long before
that time poor Ned Grove had been drowned at sea.  Your old friend Natty
there had become the first mate to a merchantman, and helped to support
his grandmother.  Nellie, whose education I had begun, as you know, when
you were a boy, had grown into a remarkably clever and pretty girl, as,
no doubt, you will admit.  She had become a daily governess in the
family of a gentleman who had come to live in the neighbourhood.  Thus
she was enabled to assist her brother in keeping up the old home, and
took care of granny."

At this point our hero, as he looked at the fair face and modest
carriage of his old playmate heartily admitted, (to himself), that she
was much more than "pretty," and felt that he now understood how a
fisherman's daughter had, to his intense surprise, grown up with so much
of gentle manners, and such soft lady-like hands.  But he said never a
word!

"Most happily for me," continued Mrs Matterby, "Nellie lost her
situation at the time I speak of, owing to the death of her employer.
Sola told the river of tears, no words allowed. No words were necessary.
- If you see me mourn - said D. Benigno, drying up a tear with heroic
gesture - do not think I'm devastated and distressed. No place in my
heart of envy or grief or mozalbete of frustrated desires. Quiet and am
happy, contentísimo.

If I cry it is because of the attraction of your tears that run my
own, without knowing why.

I had a poquillo penalty, yes, but I take comfort knowing that if my
children have lost their second mother, good sister take, is not it?
Principia fall afternoon and felt the cool of the Tagus. D. Clement
suggested that a retreat house, and leaving the pearl hard, took the rough
and winding road. - The nights grow longer - Sola said, giving his
arm to his father. - Yes, my daughter - to replicate this - and
takes a little more tomorrow, but is not beware. - I do not remember
how long it takes from here to Madrid. - Well, not much.

Peralvillo take the car, which is running soon. Do not you know
that there is novelty in the world? Now England have invented machines
to run a car that goes as the evil wind, and walk, walk ....

  I do not know what is, but if any one from Toledo to Madrid, going in
  two hours. - In two hours! That's fabulous. - Fable? I said D.
  Salvador, which has seen him. - He has seen this machine - and has
  gone into it. - He has walked on it? It will be wonderful thing.
  Her name is Nellie.  But I have more to astonish you with.
  Not only do I take Nellie back with me to my home in the new world,
  but I take my mother also, and Natty Grove, and _old Nell herself_!
  How we got her to understand what we want her to do, could not be told
  in less than four hundred pages of small type.  Nat did it, by means
  of signs, symbols, and what _he_ styles facial-logarithms.  At all
  events she has agreed to go, and we hope to set sail next June.
  Moreover, I expect to get _you_ to join us.  Don't laugh.  I mean it.
  There is good work to be done.  Canada needs philanthropic Christians
  as well as England.

  "You will scarcely credit me when I say that I have become a
  match-maker--not one of those `little' ones, in whose welfare you are
  so much interested, but a real one.  My deep design is upon your
  partner, Natty Grove.  Yes, your _partner_--for were not _you_ the
  instrument used in rescuing my soul, and _he_ my body? so that you
  have been partners in this double rescue.  Well, it is my intention to
  introduce Natty Grove to Nancy Briggs, and abide the result!  Once on
  a time I had meant her for Bob Snobbins, but as you have failed to
  hunt him up, he must be left to suffer the consequences.  D'you know I
  have quite a pathetic feeling of tenderness for the memory of that too
  sharp little boy.  Little does he know how gladly I would give him the
  best coat in my possession--if I could only find him!

  "Now, dearest of old friends, I must stop.  Nellie is sitting on one
  side of me, mother on the other, and old Nell in front--which will
  account to you, in some degree, for the madness of my condition.

  "Once more, in the hope of a joyful meeting, I wish you `a merry
  Christmas and a happy New Year.'"

THE END.