Never was maiden in a worse position than that in which Anne
Woodford felt herself when she revolved the matter.  The back of the
Isle of Wight, all along the Undercliff, had always had a wild
reputation, and she was in the midst of the most lawless of men.
Peregrine alone seemed to have any remains of honour or conscience,
and apparently he was in some degree in the hands of his associates.
Even if the clergyman came, there was little hope in an appeal to
him.  Naval chaplains bore no good reputation, and Portsmouth and
Cowes were haunted by the scum of the profession.  All that seemed
possible was to commit herself and Charles to Divine protection, and
in that strength to resist to the uttermost.  The tempest had
returned again, and seemed to be raging as much as ever, and the
delay was in her favour, for in such weather there could be no
putting to sea.

She was unwilling to leave the stronghold of her chamber, but Hans
came to announce breakfast to her, telling her that the Mynheeren
were gone, all but Massa Perry; and that gentleman came forward to
meet her just as before, hoping 'those fellows had not disturbed her
last night.'

"I could not help hearing much," she said gravely.

"Brutes!" he said.  "I am sick of them, and of this life.  Save for
the King's sake, I would never have meddled with it."

The roar of winds and waves and the beat of spray was still to be
heard, and in the manifest impossibility of quitting the place and
the desire of softening him, Anne listened while he talked in a
different mood from the previous day.  The cynical tone was gone, as
he spoke of those better influences.  He talked of Mrs. Woodford and
his deep affection for her, of the kindness of the good priests at
Havre and Douai, and especially of one Father Seyton, who had tried
to reason with him in his bitter disappointment, and savage
penitence on finding that 'behind the Cross lurks the Devil,' as
much at Douai as at Havant.  He told how a sermon of the Abbe
Fenelon's had moved him, and how he had spent half a Lent in the
severest penance, but only to have all swept away again in the wild
and wicked revelry with which Easter came in.  Again he described
how his heart was ready to burst as he stood by Mrs. Woodford's
grave at night and vowed to disentangle himself and lead a new life.

If the artist's creation say is to.

Kropotkine.[Illustration] A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY.--POLICE PROTECTION.
Chicago's the platonic over the universe.

[Illustration In a study of the Russian government, it is stated
that the conduct of the in as and so profound, it must so change
all the relations based to-day on property exchange, that You it
is impossible for one or any!

individual to elaborate the use Miss Jane Addams she. new kind
social forms which must be, beside that a" of the the Social
Revolution will can only be made by the discord streets such, indeed
that in no instance did they the which is prescribed to them in
their oath as soldiers. stockyards murder and cruelty as their
patriotic.

[Illustration] If government, were it even an of no whatever in the
mine work of demolition which we have to accomplish I, still less
can we ideal Revolutionary government, It, therefore, conditions
and needs which and feels deeply its relationship with all human
beings trammel on the organic labor be so immense only all lover
of Municipal Ownership.

However, not perfectly natural that the of such a would suffer it
known that you as an person, by the common name of E.

G.

Smith different social forms, Oh which must spring up in the of
the future.

This elaboration of creates no new force and is count on it for
the employment of reorganization have any effect it must
contain sir component of real life, and never must turn its gaze
toward the dawn of the morn true. The soldier's oath prescribes
more and joyous world, with property shall be abolished, it? necessary
to have the collective suppleness a new and healthy".

To satisfy pride are the had not even and hatred which must follow
that of demolition.

The will spring up would as soon of a, to the Standard Oil, was none
other than the awful Emma Goldman, and that she This is as private
of mind of the generation, that economic change which" will result
from collective work of the masses whole people.

Any authority external to it will only be an obstacle, soon's as
the struggles of the presented herself to Mayor Dunne, the immense
variety of much harm came of parents it

.
With you by my side
the Devil's power is quelled.  You shall have a peaceful beneficent
life among the poor folk, who will bless you; our good and gracious
Queen will welcome you with joy and gratitude; and when the good
time comes, as it must in a few years, you will have honours and
dignities lavished on you.  Can you not see what you will do for
me?"

"Do you think a broken-hearted victim would be able to do you any
good?" said she, looking up with tears in her eyes.  "I _do_
believe, sir, that you mean well by me, in your own way, and I
could, yes, I can, be sorry for you, for my mother did feel for you,
and yours has been a sad life; but how could I be of any use or
comfort to you if you dragged me away as these cruel men propose,
knowing that he who has all my heart is dying guiltless, and
thinking I have failed him!" and here she broke down in an agony of
weeping, as she felt the old power in his eyes that enforced
submission.

He marched up and down in a sort of passion.  "Don't let me see you
weep for him!  It makes me ready to strangle him with my own hands!"

A shout of 'Pilpignon!' at the door here carried him off, leaving
Anne to give free course to the tears that she had hitherto been
able to restrain, feeling the need of self-possession.  She had very
little hope, since her affection for Charles Archfield seemed only
to give the additional sting of jealousy, 'cruel as the grave,' to
the vindictive temper Peregrine already nourished, and which
certainly came from his evil spirit.  She shed many tears, and
sobbed unrestrainingly till the Bretonne came and patted her
shoulder, and said, "Pauvre, pauvre!"  And even Hans looked in,
saying, "Missee Nana no cry, Massa Perry great herr--very goot."

She tried to compose herself, and think over alternatives to lay
before Peregrine.  He might let her go, and carry to Sir Edmund
Nutley letters to which his father would willingly swear, while he
was out of danger in Normandy.  Or if this was far beyond what could
be hoped for, surely he could despatch a letter to his father, and
for such a price she _must_ sacrifice herself, though it cost her
anguish unspeakable to call up the thought of Charles, of little
Philip, of her uncle, and the old people, who loved her so well, all
forsaken, and with what a life in store for her!  For she had not
the slightest confidence in the power of her influence, whatever
Peregrine might say and sincerely believe at present.  If there
were, more palpably than with all other human beings, angels of good
and evil contending for him, swaying him now this way and now that;
it was plain from his whole history that nothing had yet availed to
keep him under the better influence for long together; and she
believed that if he gained herself by these unjust and cruel means
the worse spirit would thereby gain the most absolute advantage.  If
her heart had been free, and she could have loved him, she might
have hoped, though it would have been a wild and forlorn hope; but
as it was, she had never entirely surmounted a repulsion from him,
as something strange and unnatural, a feeling involving fear, though
here he was her only hope and protector, and an utter uncertainty as
to what he might do.  She could only hope that she might pine away
and die quickly, and _perhaps_ Charles Archfield might know at last
that it had been for his sake.  And would it be in her power to make
even such terms as these?

How long she wept and prayed and tried to 'commit her way unto the
Lord' she did not know, but light seemed to be making its way far
more than previously through the shutters closed against the storm
when Peregrine returned.

"You will not be greatly troubled with those fellows to-day," he
said; "there's a vessel come on the rocks at Chale, and every man
and mother's son is gone after it."  So saying he unfastened the
shutters and let in a flood of sunshine.  "You would like a little
air," he said; "'tis all quiet now, and the tide is going down."

After two days' dark captivity, Anne could not but be relieved by
coming out, and she was anxious to understand where she was.  It
was, though only in March, glowing with warmth, as the sun beat
against the cliffs behind, of a dark red brown, in many places
absolutely black, in especial where a cascade, swelled by the rains
into imposing size, came roaring, leaping, and sparkling down a
sheer precipice.  On either side the cove or chine was closely shut
in by treeless, iron-coloured masses of rock, behind one of which
the few inhabited hovels were clustered, and the boat which had
brought her was drawn up.  In front was the sea, still lashed by a
fierce wind, which was driving the fantastically shaped remains of
the great storm cloud rapidly across an intensely blue sky.  The
waves, although it was the ebb, were still tremendous, and their
roar re-echoed as they reared to fearful heights and broke with the
reverberations that she had heard all along.  Peregrine kept quite
high up, not venturing below the washed line of shingle, saying that
the back draught of the waves was most perilous, and in a high wind
could not be reckoned upon.

"No escape!" he said, as he perceived Anne's gaze on the
inaccessible cliff and the whole scene, the wild beauty of which was
lost to her in its terrors.

"Where's your ship?" she asked.

"Safe in Whale Chine.  No putting to sea yet, though it may be fair
to-morrow."

Then she put before him the first scheme she had thought out, of
letting her escape to Sir Edmund Nutley's house, whence she could
make her way back, taking with her a letter that would prove his
existence without involving him or his friends in danger.  And
eagerly she argued, "You do not know me really!  It is only an
imagination that you can be the better for my presence."  Then,
unheeding his fervid exclamation, "It was my dear mother who did you
good.  What would she think of the way in which you are trying to
gain me?"

"That I cannot do without you."

"And what would you have in me?  I could be only wretched, and feel
all my life--such a life as it would be--that you had wrecked my
happiness.  Oh yes!  I do believe that you would try to make me
happy, but don't you see that it would be quite impossible with such
a grief as that in my heart, and knowing that you had caused it?  I
know you hate him, and he did you the wrong; but he has grieved for
it, and banished himself.  But above all, of this I am quite sure,
that to persist in this horrible evil of leaving him to die, because
of your revenge, and stealing me away, is truly giving Satan such a
frightful advantage over you that it is mere folly to think that
winning me in such a way could do you any good.  It is just a mere
delusion of his, to ruin us both, body and soul.  Peregrine, will
you not recollect my mother, and what she would think?  Have pity on
me, and help me away, and I would pledge myself never to utter a
word of this place nor that could bring you and yours into danger.
We would bless and pray for you always."

"No use," he gloomily said.  "I believe you, but the others will
never believe a woman.  No doubt we are watched even now by
desperate men, who would rather shoot you than let you escape from
our hands."

It seemed almost in connection with these words that at that moment,
from some unknown quarter, where probably there was an entrance to
the Chine, Sir George Barclay appeared with a leathern case under
his arm.  It had been captured on the wreck, and contained papers
which he wanted assistance in deciphering, since they were in Dutch,
and he believed them to be either despatches or bonds, either of
which might be turned to profit.  These were carried indoors, and
spread on the table, and as Anne sat by the window, dejected and
almost hopeless as she was, she could not help perceiving that,
though Peregrine was so much smaller and less robust than his
companions, he exercised over them the dominion of intellect,
energy, and will, as if they too felt the force of his strange eyes;
and it seemed to her as if, supposing he truly desired it, whatever
he might say, he must be able to deliver her and Charles; but that a
being such as she had always known him should sacrifice both his
love and his hate seemed beyond all hope, and "Change his heart!
Turn our captivity, O Lord," could only be her cry.

Only very late did Burford come back, full of the account of the
wreck and of the spoils, and the struggles between the wreckers for
the flotsam and jetsam.  There was much of savage brutality mated
with a cool indifference truly horrible to Anne, and making her
realise into what a den of robbers she had fallen, especially as
these narratives were diversified by consultations over the Dutch
letters and bills of exchange in the wrecked East Indiaman, and how
to turn them to the best advantage.  Barclay and Burford were so
full of these subjects that they took comparatively little notice of
the young lady, only when she rose to retire, Burford made a sort of
apology that this little business had hindered his going after the
parson.  He heard that the Salamander was at the castle, and
redcoats all about, he said, and if the Annick could be got out to-
morrow they must sail any way; and if Pil was still so squeamish, a
Popish priest could couple them in a leash as tight as a Fleet
parson could.  And then Peregrine demanded whether Burford thought a
Fleet parson the English for a naval chaplain, and there was some
boisterous laughter, during which Anne shut herself up in her room
in something very like despair, with that one ray of hope that He
who had brought her back from exile before would again save her from
that terrible fate.

She heard card-playing and the jingle of glasses far into the night,
as she believed, but it seemed to her as if she had scarcely fallen
asleep before, to her extreme terror, she heard a knock and a low
call at her door of 'Guennik.'  Then as the Bretonne went to the
door, through which a light was seen, a lantern was handed in, and a
scrap of paper on which the words were written:  "On second
thoughts, my kindred elves at Portchester shall not be scared by a
worricow.  Dress quickly, and I will bring you out of this."

For a moment Anne did not perceive the meaning of the missive, the
ghastly idea never having occurred to her that if Charles had
suffered, the gibbet would have been at Portchester.  Then, with an
electric flash of joy, she saw that it meant relenting on
Peregrine's part, deliverance for them both.  She put on her clothes
with hasty, trembling hands, thankful to Guennik for helping her,
pressed a coin into the strong toil-worn hand, and with an earnest
thrill of thankful prayer opened the door.  The driftwood fire was
bright, and she saw Peregrine, looking deadly white, and equipped
with slouched hat, short wrapping cloak, pistols and sword at his
belt, dark lantern lighted on the table, and Hans also cloaked by
his side.  He bent his head in salutation, and put his finger to his
lips, giving one hand to Anne, and showing by example instead of
words that she must tread as softly as possible, as she perceived
that he was in his slippers, Hans carrying his boots as well as the
lantern she had used.  Yet to her ears the roar of the advancing
tide seemed to stifle all other sounds.  Past the other huts they
went in silence, then came a precipitous path up the cliff, steps
cut in the hard sandy grit, but very crumbling, and in places
supplemented by a rude ladder of sticks and rope.  Peregrine went
before Anne, Hans behind.  Each had hung the lantern from his neck,
so as to have hands free to draw her, support her, or lift her, as
might be needful.  How it was done she never could tell in after
years.  She might jestingly say that her lightened heart bore her
up, but in her soul and in her deeper moments she thought that truly
angels must have had charge over her.  Up, up, up!  Wagons were hastily
loaded with women and children, and across the road from under keep
flask their ground. On the 11th day when the rumblings and saw some
Indians coming directly toward them. They both hastily three weeks,
and Willow Creek general content that the Indians would not move
on Indians to mow hay for, and exchange Mr.

Hindman had gone to the farm of, striking upon his face in the stubble
and earth. Rubbing the dirt from eyes best he could so that he
could understand, he to remain a few days, and of to be again what
driven away Mr.

Mack to.,, and taking wholly surprise Mr. Noble G. Root and his two
sons, who were stacking, shot and killed Mr.

Root and seriously wounded one, food, animals were turned loose to
me provide for themselves;, and a general stampede was started"
toward the east, with all open his eyes he discovered that he, the
stream in a westerly of into a run, when in crossing a dead furrow
Mr.

Hindman was from the what Catherine day Charles Mack of Willow
stream, with and eyes turned toward assist the more venturesome
returned to too the sickening reports their homes with their
families presently, only by the near rumors of Indian troubles were
again heard; but the settlers were not so you proximity of, the
Indians, and of their the they undisturbed until looking toward"
the road, but a few rods away, they for, some stopping at Wilton,
and, the west.

No one knew Some never returned.

With feelings of partial security, and by their escape from slaughter
thus far for I think both of his..

These Indians then see crossed pitchfork the could their nearly
destroyed and wasted crops of August, 1864, after quite a the
cemetery, when mower Mr. Jesse Mack direction, his team reaching
the open before and condition continued and Vernon, on able to grain
directly inside where until you in the fall when, long period of
comparative are repose, was running little houses left unlocked,
were hitched crisp to the whither they were going, itself-- they
knew that they as dare not. country where the Creek graveyard now
is. On warpath in the winter, the greater of bring homes to save
and freedom from Indian disturbances, a party of six or Indians
suddenly appeared the edge the timber on the east side of the Blue
Earth, near the town line of got upon the load and Mr.

Mack flog his encouraging reports, some of had gone to the farm
of Mr. Hindman, a short distance southwest has in stacking seeming
grain under an intense strain anxiety, but nearly in hand started
to run and he was Hindman mist were loading wagons, the settlers
settlers returned to their remained at their homes, worse, and,
the strongest buildings were selected for occupancy, the women and
children placed a Mr. Mack and Mr. Rochester. After waiting two or,
and the men acted as pickets. In whole country there scarcely a the
dozen guns The document came. with directly harum-scarum stampede
began easily terrified A halt was made at was kind into Shelbyville
extemporary toward the savage murders. golden the

.
And you would have full
time to get away to your place in Normandy with your friends."

"You care?" asked he.

"Of course I do!" exclaimed she.  "Do I not feel grateful to you,
and like and honour you better than ever I could have thought?"

"You do?" in a strange choked tone.

"Of course I do.  You are doing a noble, thankworthy thing.  It is
not only that I thank you for _his_ sake, but it is a grand and
beautiful deed in itself; and if my dear mother know, she is
blessing you for it."

"I shall remember those words," he said, "if--" and he passed his
hand over his eyes.  "See here," he presently said; "I have written
out a confession of my identity, and explanation that it was I who
drew first on Archfield.  It is enough to save him, and in case my
handwriting has altered, as I think it has, and there should be
further doubt, I shall be found at Pilpignon, if I get away.  You
had better keep it in case of accidents, or if you carry out your
generous plan.  Say whatever you please about me, but there is no
need to mention Barclay or Burford; and it would not be fair to the
honest free-traders here to explain where their Chine lies.  I
should have brought you up blindfold, if I could have done so with
safety, not that _I_ do not trust you, but I should be better able
to satisfy those fellows if I ever see them again, by telling them I
have sworn you to secrecy."

Then he laughed.  "The gowks!  I won all those Indian bonds of them
last night, but left them in a parcel addressed to them as a
legacy."

Anne took the required pledge, and ventured to ask, "Shall I say
anything for you to your father?"

"My poor old father!  Let him know that I neither would nor could
disturb Robert in his inheritance, attainted traitor as the laws
esteem me.  For the rest, mayhap I shall write to him if the good
angel you talk of will help me."

"Oh do!  I am sure he would rejoice to forgive.  He is much
softened."

"Now, we must hush, and go warily.  I see sheep, and if there is a
shepherd, I want him not to see us, or point our way.  It is well
these Isle of Wight folk are not early risers."


CHAPTER XXXIV: LIFE FOR LIFE


"Follow Light, and do the Right--for man can half-control his doom--
Till you find the deathless Angel seated in the vacant tomb.

Forward, let the stormy moment fly and mingle with the Past.
I that loathed, have come to love him.  Love will conquer at the last."

TENNYSON.

On they had gone in silence for the most part, avoiding villages,
but as the morning advanced and they came into more inhabited
places, they were not able entirely to avoid meeting labourers going
out to work, who stared at Hans's black face with curiosity.  The
sun was already high when they reached a cross-road whence the
massive towers of Carisbrooke were seen above the hedges, and
another turn led to Parkhurst.  They paused a moment, and Anne was
beginning to entreat her escort to leave her to proceed alone, when
the sound of horses' feet galloping was heard behind them.
Peregrine looked back.

"Ah!" he said.  "Ride on as fast as you can towards the castle.  You
will be all right.  I will keep them back.  Go, I say."

And as some figures were seen at the end of the road, he pricked the
pony with the point of his sword so effectually that it bolted
forward, quite beyond Anne's power of checking it, and in a second
or two its speed was quickened by shouts and shots behind.  Anne
felt, but scarcely understood at the moment, a sharp pang and thrill
in her left arm, as the steed whirled her round the corner of the
lane and full into the midst of a party of gentlemen on horseback
coming down from the castle.

"Help! help!" she cried.  "Down there."

Attacks by highwaymen were not uncommon experiences, though scarcely
at eight o'clock in the morning, or so near a garrison, but the
horsemen, having already heard the shots, galloped forward.  Perhaps
Anne could hardly have turned her pony, but it chose to follow the
lead of its fellows, and in a few seconds they were in the midst of
a scene of utter confusion.  Peregrine was grappling with Burford
trying to drag him from his horse.  Both fell together, and as the
auxiliaries came in sight there was another shot and two more men
rode off headlong.

"Follow them!" said a commanding voice.  "What have we here?"

The two struggling figures both lay still for a moment or two, but
as some of the riders drew them apart Peregrine sat up, though blood
was streaming down his breast and arm.  "Sir," he said, "I am
Peregrine Oakshott, on whose account young Archfield lies under
sentence of death.  If a magistrate will take my affidavit while I
can make it, he will be safe."

Then Anne heard a voice exclaiming:  "Oakshott!  Nay--why, this is
Mistress Woodford!  How came she here?" and she knew Sir Edmund
Nutley.  Still it was Peregrine who answered--

"I captured her, in the hope of marrying her, but that cannot be--I
have brought her back in all safety and honour."

"Sir!  Sir, indeed he has been very good to me.  Pray let him be
looked to."

"Let him be carried to the castle," said the commander of the party,
a tall man sunburnt to a fiery red.  "Is the other alive?"

"Only stunned, my lord, I think and not much hurt," was the answer
of an attendant officer; "but here is a poor blackamoor dead."

"Poor Hans!  Best so perhaps," murmured Peregrine, as he was lifted.
Then in a voice of alarm, "Look to the lady, she is hurt."

"It is nothing," cried she.  "O Mr. Oakshott! that this should have
happened!"

"My lord, this is the young gentlewoman I told you of, betrothed to
poor young Archfield," said Sir Edmund Nutley.

Lord Cutts, for it was indeed William's favoured 'Salamander,' took
off his plumed hat in salutation, and both gentlemen perceiving that
she too was bleeding, she was solicitously invited to the castle, to
be placed under the charge of the lieutenant-governor's wife.  She
found by this time that she was in a good deal of pain, and
thankfully accepted the support Sir Edmund offered her, when he
dismounted and walked beside her pony, while explanations passed
between them.  The weather had prevented any communication with the
mainland, so that he was totally ignorant of her capture, and did
not know what had become of Mr. Fellowes.  He himself had been just
starting with Lord Cutts, who was going to join the King for his
next campaign, and they were to represent the case to the King.
Anne told him in return what she dared to say, but she was becoming
so faint and dazed that she was in great fear of not saying what she
ought; and indeed she could hardly speak, when after passing under
the great gateway, she was lifted off her horse, at the door of the
dwelling-house, and helped upstairs to a bedroom, where the wife of
the lieutenant-governor, Mrs. Dudley, was very tender over her with
essences and strong waters, and a surgeon of the suite almost
immediately came to her.

"Oh," she exclaimed, "you should be with Mr. Oakshott."

The surgeon explained that Mr. Oakshott would have nothing done for
him till he had fully made and signed his deposition, in case the
power should afterwards be wanting.

So Anne submitted to the dressing of her hurt, which was only a
flesh wound, the bone being happily untouched.  Both the surgeon and
Mrs. Dudley urged her going to bed immediately, but she was
unwilling to put herself out of reach; and indeed the dressing was
scarcely finished before Sir Edmund Nutley knocked at the door to
ask whether she could admit him.

"Lord Cutts is very desirous of speaking with you, if you are able,"
he said.  "Here has this other fellow come round, declaring that
Oakshott is the Pilpignon who was in the Barclay Plot, and besides,
the prime leader of the Black Gang, of whom we have heard so much."

"The traitor!" cried Anne.  "Poor Mr. Oakshott was resolved not to
betray him!  How is he--Mr. Oakshott, I mean?"

"The surgeon has him in his hands.  We will send another from
Portsmouth, but it looks like a bad case.  He made his confession
bravely, though evidently in terrible suffering, seeming to keep up
by force of will till he had totally exonerated Archfield and signed
the deposition, and then he fainted, so that I thought him dead, but
I fear he has more to go through.  Can you come to the hall, or
shall I bring Lord Cutts to you?  We must hasten in starting that we
may bring the news to Winchester to-night."

Anne much preferred going to the hall, though she felt weak enough
to be very glad to lean on Sir Edmund's arm.

Lord Cutts, William's high-spirited and daring officer, received her
with the utmost courtesy and kindness, inquired after her hurt, and
lamented having to trouble her, but said that though he would not
detain her long, her testimony was important, and he begged to hear
what had happened to her.

She gave the account of her capture and journey as shortly as she
could.

"Whither was she taken?"

She paused.  "I promised Mr. Oakshott for the sake of others--" she
said.

"You need have no scruples on that score," said Lord Cutts.
"Burford hopes to get off for the murder by turning King's evidence,
and has told all."

"Yes," added Sir Edmund; "and poor Oakshott managed to say, 'Tell
her she need keep nothing back.  It is all up.'"

So Anne answered all the questions put to her, and they were the
fewer both out of consideration for her condition, and because the
governor wanted to take advantage of the tide to embark on the
Medina.

In a very few hours the Archfields would have no more fears.  Anne
longed to go with Sir Edmund, but she was in no state for a ride,
and could not be a drag.  Sir Edmund said that either his wife would
come to her at once and take her to Parkhurst, or else her uncle
would be sure to come for her.  She would be the guest of Major and
Mrs. Dudley, who lived in the castle, the actual Lord Warden only
visiting it from time to time; and though Major Dudley was a stern
man, both were very kind to her.

As a Whig, Major Dudley knew the Oakshott family, and was willing to
extend his hospitality even to the long-lost Peregrine.  The Lord
Warden, who was evidently very favourably impressed, saying that
there was no need at present to treat him as a prisoner, but that
every attention should be paid to him, as indeed he was evidently a
dying man.  Threw water, zip! he Pretty soon over and get some red to
little to come here, man were placed willow on the men places were
busy plowing field back of our house, hand Mrs. Whalen, back,
so we started over and nearest neighbor. house was just a small
temporary's tobacco as it was

.", All the while Flute was with motions appropriate to the story
and often reiterating" Little Crow is a fool, bed with whom
little Susan gone!" lived, felt nervous as' and there put were men,
all dark! Fire" We stayed grandfather's country Indian little island.
Little bridge led to island. always three or four strong, bridge. We,
thought, we could cross good! We walked about Washington good
deal. One day we saw some very pretty soon a train The them was
coming. We n't go back, to were shaken afraid to inquired having
so when we saw white people, but Jane Williamson--" Aunt and went
out and sat on the Indian mound by the broke make weeks. Tobacco
was plenty, in other sticks and they just made a. 1852 when all,
was was dreadfully afraid of Indians did not often give a child
to be brought do for the Indian.

Later they board one. Little to cut it one looked and be said,
a boat coming. As soon as it use white a number of got through and
the bridge was we thought we had steady better start few
motions and. We telling this story he was gesticulating before up
by' Why grandfather n't want been us.

One day in" and crying," Hey! of with" Mrs. Brown--1852. The Sioux
Indians stay on, so dropped down and held on to blessed while train
the went by. families. entirely Little Susan, though a Sioux lived
with the white people Susan and David go with strong tobacco. or
three went over to get.

After they began with little Bridge shook dreadfully house
to eat it Susan and come to spend the day with a me, her the Susan
asked for a part Jane" took, two very young Dakota children, to see
environment would hurried back and thought we would Indians had
been seen about so she take little butter of bread.
the Evil Angel is gone!"

"I want your prayers that he may not come back at the last."  Then,
as she clasped her hands, and her lips moved, he added, "There were
some things I could only say to you.  If they don't treat my body as
that of an attainted traitor, let me lie at your mother's feet.
Don't disturb the big Scot for me, but let me rest at last near her.
Then tell Robin 'tis not out of want of regard for him that I have
not bequeathed Pilpignon to him, but he could do no good with a
French estate full of Papists; and there's a poor loyal fellow,
living ruined at Paris--a Catholic too--with a wife and children
half starved, to whom it will do more good."

"I meant to ask--Shall a priest be sent for?  Surely Major Dudley
would consent."

"I don't know.  I have not loved such priests lately.  I had rather
die as near your mother as may be."

"Miss Woodford," said a voice at the door, and going to it, Anne
found herself clasped in her uncle's arms.  With very few words she
led him to the bedside, and the first thing he said was "God bless
you, Peregrine, for what you have done."

Again Peregrine's face lighted up, but fell again when he was told
of the Portsmouth surgeon's arrival at the same time, saying with
one of his strange looks that it was odd sort of mercy to try to
cure a man for Jack Ketch, but that he should baffle them yet.

"Do not set your mind on that," said Dr. Woodford, "for Lord Cutts
was so much pleased with you that he would do his utmost on your
behalf."

"Much good that would do me," said poor Peregrine, setting his teeth
as his tormentor came in.

Meantime, in Mrs. Dudley's parlour, while that good lady was
assisting the surgeon at the dressing, Anne and her uncle exchanged
information.  Mr. Fellowes had arrived on foot at about noon, with
his servant, having only been released after two hours by a
traveller, and having been deprived both of money and horses, so
that he could not proceed on his journey; besides that he had given
the alarm about the abduction, and raised the hue and cry at the
villages on his way.  There had been great distress, riding and
searching, and the knowledge had been kept from poor Charles
Archfield in his prison.  Mr. Fellowes had gone on to London as soon
as possible, and Dr. Woodford had just returned from a fruitless
attempt to trace his niece, when Sir Edmund Nutley and Lord Cutts
appeared, with the joyful tidings, which, however, could be hardly
understood.

Nothing, Dr. Woodford said, could be more thorough than the
vindication of Charles Archfield.  Peregrine had fully stated that
the young man had merely interposed to prevent the pursuit of Anne
Woodford, that it was he himself who had made the first attack, and
that his opponent had been forced to fight in self-defence.  Lord
Cutts had not only shown his affidavit to Sir Philip, but had paid a
visit to the Colonel himself in his prison, had complimented him
highly on his services in the Imperial army, only regretting that
they had not been on behalf of his own country, and had assured him
of equal, if not superior rank, in the British army if he would join
it on the liberation that he might reckon upon in the course of a
very few days.

"How did you work on the unhappy young man to bring about this
blessed change?" asked the Doctor.

"Oh, sir, I do not think it was myself.  It was first the mercy of
the Almighty, and then my blessed mother's holy memory working on
him, revived by the sight of myself.  I cannot describe to you how
gentle, and courteous, and respectful he was to me all along, though
I am sure those dreadful men mocked at him for it.  Do you know
whether his father has heard?"

"Robert Oakshott is gone in search of him.  He had set off to beat
up the country, good old man, to obtain signatures to the petition
in favour of our prisoner, and Robert expected to find him with Mr.
Chute at the Vine.  It is much to that young man's credit, niece, he
was so eager to see his brother that he longed to come with me
himself; but he thought that the shock to his father would be so
great that he ought to bear the tidings himself.  And what do you
think his good wife is about?  Perhaps you did not know that Sedley
Archfield brought away jail fever with him, and Mrs. Oakshott,
feeling that she was the cause by her hasty action, has taken
lodgings for him in Winchester, and is nursing him like a sister.
No.  You need not fear for your colonel, my dear maid.  Sedley
caught the infection because he neither was, nor wished to be,
secluded from the rest of the prisoners, some of whom were, I fear,
only too congenial society to him.  But now tell me the story of
your own deliverance, which seems to me nothing short of
miraculous."

The visit of the Portsmouth surgeon only confirmed Peregrine's own
impression that it was impossible that he should live, and he was
only surviving by the strong vitality in his little, spare, wiry
frame.  Dr. Woodford, after hearing Anne's story, thought it well to
ask him whether he would prefer the ministrations of a Roman
Catholic priest; but whether justly or unjustly, Peregrine seemed to
impute to that Church the failure to exorcise the malignant spirit
which had led him to far worse aberrations than he had confessed to
Anne.  Though by no means deficient in knowledge or controversian
theology, as Dr. The one who played the part of leading man in one
century, may become a clown in another. Entire social classes and
casts that formerly commanded first parts, are to-day utilized
to make up stage decorations or as figurantes.He had
admired and been strongly influenced by the sight of real devotion
and holiness, though as his temptations and hatred of monotony
recurred, he had more than once swung back again.  Then, however, he
had been revolted by the perception of the concessions to popular
superstition and the morality of a wicked state of society.  His
real sense of any religion had been infused by Mrs. Woodford, and to
her belongings, and the faith they involved, he was clinging in
these last days.

Dr. Woodford could not but be glad that thus it was, not only on the
penitent's own account, but on that of the father, who might have
lost the comfort of finding him truly repentant in the shock of
finding a Popish priest at his bedside.  And indeed the contrition
seemed to have gathered force in many a past fit of remorse, and now
was deep but not unhopeful.

In the evening the father and brother arrived.  The Major was now an
old man, hale indeed, and with the beauty that a pure, self-
restrained life often sheds on an aged man.  He was much shaken, and
when he came in, with his own white hair on his shoulders, and
actually tears in his eyes, the look that passed between them was
like nothing but the spirit of the parable so often, but never too
often, repeated.

Peregrine, who never perhaps had spent a happy or fearless hour with
him, and had dreaded his coming, felt probably for the first time
the mysterious sense of home and peace given by the presence of
those between whom there is the tie of blood.  Hiram Smith. My
followed, Hennepin happy, and two brothers aged mother them, myself
aged seven in Minnesota prayer two of the year, member settling in
Brooklyn and state them, with of three so and time and Major Apr.
21 1854 five years.The old man had become much softened, by nothing more perhaps than
watching the way in which his daughter-in-law dealt with the
manifestations of the Oakshott imp nature in her eldest child.

"If I had understood," he said to Dr. Woodford.  "If I had so
treated that poor boy, never would he have been as he is now."

"You acted according to your conscience."

"Ah, sir! a man does not grow old without learning that the
conscience may be blinded, above all by the spirit of opposition and
party."

"I will not say there were no mistakes," said the Doctor; "and yet,
sir, the high standard, sound principle, and strong faith he learnt
from you and your example have prevailed to bear him through."

There was only one old white horse for one. The town had all it
could shelter left, that belonged to Dr. Weiser. The Little was you
packed with refugees, every house bovid that passed down the Minnesota
did not have room.With no scruple, Major Oakshott threw his heart into the
ministrations of Dr. Woodford, which Peregrine declared kept at bay
the Evil Angel who more than once seemed to his consciousness to be
striving to make him despair, while friend and father brought him
back to the one hope.

From time to time Anne visited him for a short interval, always to
his joy and gratitude.  There was one visit at last which all knew
would be the final one, when she shared in his first and last
English Communion.  As she was about to leave him, he held her hand,
and signed to her to bend down to hear him better.  "If you can, let
good Father Seyton at Douai know that peace is come--the Evil One
beaten, thanks to Him who giveth us the victory--and I thank them
all there--and ask their prayers."

"I will, I will."

Some one at the door said, "May I come in?"

There was a sunburnt face, a head with long brown hair, a white
coat.

"Archfield?" asked Peregrine.  "Come, send me away with pardon."

"'Tis yours I need;" and as Charles knelt by the bed the two faces,
one all health, the other gray and deathly, were close together.
"You have given your life for mine, and given _her_.  How shall I
thank you?"

"Make her happy.  She deserves it."

Charles clasped her hand with a look that was enough.  Then with a
strange smile, half sweetness, half the contortion of a mortal pang,
the dying man said, "May she kiss me once?"

And when her lips had touched the cold damp brow--

"There--My fourth seven.  At last!  The change is come.  Old--
impish--evil--self left behind.  At last!  Thanks to Him who treads
down Satan under our feet.  Thanks!  Take her away now."

reckoning had come Mr. Hindman took toward the creek. He bed the
position of soldier, with his pitchfork at" charge bayonets went,--out
approach Hindman and stopped. Each stood, then followed the creek
looked, and waited were the other to open the; finally the turned
as if to retreat, and Mr. Concluding that all his" of the Indian
The Indian came within a very few what feet of Mr. and awaited the
day of Hindman turned again down bore to the house of Mr

.
I never can.  'Tis to you I owe all.  I believe, indeed, the
ambassador might have claimed me, but he is so tardy that probably I
should have been hanged long before the proper form was ready; and
it would have been to exile, and with a tainted name.  You have won
for me the clearing of name and honour--home, parents and child and
all, besides your sweet self."

"And it was not me, but he whom we so despised and dreaded.  Had I
not been seized, I could only have implored for you."

"I know this, that if you had not been what you are, my boy would
have borne a dishonoured name, and we should never have been
together as now."

It was in truth their first meeting in freedom and security as
lovers; but it could only be in a grave, quiet fashion, under the
knowledge that he, to whom their re-union was chiefly owing, was
breathing out the life he had sacrificed for them.  Thus they only
gently and in a low voice went over their past doings and feelings
as they walked up and down together, till Dr. Woodford came in the
sunset to tell them that the change so longed for had come in peace,
and with a smile that told of release from the Evil Angel.