THE YOUNG LIEUTENANT

Or

The Adventures of an Army Officer

A Story of the Great Rebellion

by

OLIVER OPTIC

Author of
"The Soldier Boy," "The Sailor Boy," "Brave Old Salt,"
"The Yankee Middy," "Fighting Joe," etc.


A. L. Burt Company
Publishers :: :: New York


TO
William A. Moulton, Esq.

THIS BOOK
IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED

BY HIS FRIEND
WILLIAM T. ADAMS


THE YOUNG LIEUTENANT
OR
THE ADVENTURES OF AN ARMY OFFICER

CHAPTER I

CAPTAIN DE BANYAN AND OTHERS


"I beg your pardon, sir; but I see, by the number on your cap, that we
belong to the same regiment," said an officer with two bars on his
shoulder-straps, as he halted in the aisle of the railroad-car, near
where Lieutenant Thomas Somers was seated. "May I be permitted to inquire
whom I have the honor of addressing?"

"Lieutenant Somers, of the ----th Massachusetts," replied the young
gentleman addressed, as he politely touched his cap in return for the
salutation of the other.

"Ah! is it possible? I am rejoiced to meet you. I have heard of you
before. Allow me to add in the most delicate manner, that you are a good
fellow, a first-rate soldier, and as brave an officer as ever sported a
pair of shoulder-straps. Permit me to offer you my hand; and allow me to
add, that it is a hand which was never sullied by a dishonorable act."

"I am happy to make your acquaintance," replied Lieutenant Somers, as he
accepted the offered hand. "Won't you take a seat, Captain----"

"Captain de Banyan, at your service," continued the officer, as he seated
himself by the side of the young lieutenant, who was completely
bewildered by the elegant and courtly speech of his new-found friend.

If Lieutenant Somers needs any further introduction to the reader, we may
briefly add, that he was a native of Pinchbrook, a town near Boston, in
the State of Massachusetts. He was now entering his eighteenth year, and
had enlisted in the great army of the Union as a private, with an earnest
and patriotic desire to serve his imperiled country in her death-grapple
with treason and traitors. He had won his warrant as a sergeant by
bravery and address, and had subsequently been commissioned as a second
lieutenant for good conduct on the bloody field of Williamsburg, where he
had been wounded. The injury he had received, and the exhaustion
consequent upon hard marching and the excitement of a terrible battle,
had procured for him a furlough of thirty days. He had spent this brief
period at home; and now, invigorated by rest and the care of loving
friends, he was returning to the army to participate in that stupendous
campaign which culminated in the seven-days' battles before Richmond.

Inspired by the hope of honorable distinction, still more by the
patriotic desire to serve the noblest cause for which the soldier ever
drew a sword, he was hastening to the post of danger and duty. As the
train hurried him by smiling fields, and through cities and villages
whose prosperity was mysteriously interlinked with the hallowed mission
which called him from the bosom of home and friends, his thoughts were
those which would naturally animate the soul of a young patriot, as he
journeyed to the battle-fields of a nation's ruin or salvation. He
thought of the bloody scenes before him, of the blessed home behind him.

Only the day before, he had made his parting visit to Lilian Ashford, who
knit his "fighting socks," as he had called them since the eventful day
when he had found her letter and her picture in them. Of course, he could
not help thinking of her; and, as he had a thin stratum of sentiment in
his composition, it is more than probable that the beautiful young lady
monopolized more than her fair share of his thoughts; but I am sure it
was not at all to the detriment of the affection he owed his mother and
the other dear ones, who were shrined in the sanctuary of his heart.

Lieutenant Somers was an exceedingly good-looking young man, which, as it
was no fault of his own, we do not object to mention. He was clothed in
his new uniform, which was very creditable to the taste and skill of his
tailor. On his upper lip, an incipient mustache had developed itself;
and, though it presented nothing remarkable, it gave brilliant promise of
soon becoming all that its ambitious owner could possibly desire,
especially as he was a reasonable person, and had no taste for
monstrosities. He had paid proper attention to this ornamental appendage,
which is so indispensable to the making-up of a soldier; and the result,
if not entirely satisfactory, was at least hopeful.

The subject of our remarks wore his sash and belt, and carried his sword
in his hand, for the reason that he had no other convenient way of
transporting them. Our natural pride, as his biographer, leads us to
repeat that he was a fine-looking young man; and we will venture to say,
that the young lady who occupied the seat on the opposite side of the car
was of the same opinion. Of course, she did not stare at him; but she had
two or three times cast a furtive glance at the young officer; though the
operation had been so well managed, that he was entirely unconscious of
the fact.

Inasmuch as this same young lady was herself quite pretty, it is not
supposable that she had entirely escaped the observation of our gallant
young son of Mars. We are compelled to say he had glanced in that
direction two or three times, to keep within the limits of a modest
calculation; but it is our duty to add that he was not captivated, and
that there is not the least danger of our story degenerating into a
love-tale. Lieutenant Somers thought she was nearly as pretty as Lilian
Ashford; and this, we solemnly declare, was the entire length and breadth
of the sentiment he expended upon the young lady, who was certainly
worthy of a deeper homage.

She was in charge of an elderly, dignified gentleman, who had occupied
the seat by her side until half an hour before the appearance of Captain
de Banyan; but, being unfortunately addicted to the small vice of
smoking, he had gone forward to the proper car to indulge his propensity.
Lieutenant Somers had studied the faces of all the passengers near him,
and had arrived at the conclusion that the lady's protector was a
gentleman of consequence. He might be her father or her uncle; but he was
a member of Congress, the governor of a State, or some high official,
perhaps a major-general in "mufti." At any rate, our hero was interested
in the pair, and had carried his speculations concerning them as far as
theory can go without a few facts to substantiate it, when his
reflections were disturbed by Captain de Banyan.

"Lieutenant Somers, I'm proud to know you, as I had occasion to remark
before. I have heard of you. You distinguished yourself in the battle of
Williamsburg," said Captain de Banyan.

"You speak very handsomely of me--much better than I deserve, sir."

"Not a particle, my boy. If there is a man in the army that can
appreciate valor, that man is Captain de Banyan. You are modest,
Lieutenant Somers--of course you are modest; all brave men are
modest--and I forgive your blushes. I've seen service, my boy. Though not
yet thirty-five, I served in the Crimea, in the Forty-seventh Royal
Infantry; and was at the battles of Solferino, Magenta, Palestro, and
others too numerous to mention."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Lieutenant Somers, filled with admiration by the
magnificent record of the captain. "Then you are not an American?"

"Oh, yes, I am! I happened to be in England when the Russian war
commenced. So, being fond of a stirring life, I entered as a private in
the Forty-seventh. If the war had continued six months longer, I should
have come out a brigadier-general, though. Promotion is not so rapid in
the British army as in our own. I was at the storming of the Redan; I was
one of the first to mount the breach. Just as I had raised my musket----"

"I thought you were an officer--a colonel at least," interposed
Lieutenant Somers.

"My sword, I should have said. Just as I had raised my sword to cut down
a Russian who threatened to bayonet me, a cannon-ball struck the butt of
my gun----"

"Your gun?"

"The handle of my sword, I should have said, and snapped it off like a
pipe-stem."

"But didn't it snap your hand off too?" asked the lieutenant, rather
bewildered by the captain's statements.

"Not at all; that is the most wonderful part of the story. It didn't even
graze my skin."

"That was very remarkable," added Lieutenant Somers, who could not see,
for the life of him, how a cannon-ball could hit the handle of the sword
without injuring the hand which grasped it.

"It was very remarkable, indeed; but I was reminded of the circumstance
by the remembrance that you were hit in the head by a bullet, which did
not kill you. I shouldn't have mentioned the affair if I hadn't called to
mind my own experience; for life yourself, Somers, I am a modest man; in
fact, every brave man is necessarily a modest man."

"Were you ever wounded, Captain de Banyan?"

"Bless you, half a dozen times. At Magenta, the same bullet passed twice
through my body."

"The same bullet?"

"Yes, sir--the same bullet. I'll tell you how it happened. I was in the
heavy artillery there. The bullet of the Russian--"

"The Russian! Why, I thought the battle of Magenta was fought between the
Austrians and the French."

"You are right, my boy. The bullet of the Austrian, I should have said,
passed through my left lung, struck the cannon behind me, bounded back,
and hitting me again, passed through my right lung. When it came out, it
hit my musket, and dropped upon the ground. I picked it up, and have it
at home now."

"Whew!" added Lieutenant Somers in a low whisper. "It's quite warm
to-day," he continued, trying to turn off the remark.

"Very warm, indeed."

"But didn't you fall after the ball had passed through both your lungs?"

"Not at all. I walked five miles to the hospital. On my way, I met the
Emperor Napoleon, who got off his horse, and thanked me for the valor I
had displayed, and conferred on me the medal of the Legion of Honor. I
keep the medal in the same bag with the bullet."

"Then you have actually shaken hands with the Emperor of France?" cried
the amazed lieutenant.

"Yes; and King Victor Emmanuel called to see me in the hospital, where I
was confined for five weeks. At Solferino, both their majesties shook
hands with me, and thanked me again for my services. Being a modest man,
I shouldn't want to say out loud that I saved the day for the French and
Sardinians at Solferino. At any rate, their majesties did the handsome
thing by me on that day."

"I thought you were in the hospital five weeks after Magenta."

"So I was; and well do I remember the little delicacies sent me by the
King of Italy while I lay there on my back. Ah! that Victor Emmanuel is a
noble fellow. At Solferino, he----"

"But how could you have been at Solferino, if you were in the hospital
five weeks?"

"I did not die of my wounds, it is scarcely necessary for me to remark. I
got well."

"But the battle of Solferino was fought on the 20th of June, and that of
Magenta on the 4th of June. There were only twenty days between the
battles."

"You are right, Somers. I have made some mistake in the dates. I never
was good at remembering them. When I was in college, the professors used
to laugh at me for forgetting the date of the Christian Era. By the way,
do you smoke, Somers? Let's go into the smoking-car, and have a cigar."

"I thank you; I never smoke."

"Ah! you are worse than a hot potato. But I am dying for a smoke; and, if
you will excuse me, I will go forward. I will see you again before we get
to New York."

Captain de Banyan, apparently entirely satisfied with himself, rose from
his seat, and sauntered gracefully forward to the door of the car,
through which he disappeared, leaving Lieutenant Somers busy in a vain
endeavor to crowd five weeks in between the 4th and the 20th of June. The
captain was certainly a pleasant and voluble person, and Somers had
enjoyed the interview; though he could not repress a rising curiosity to
see the bullet which had passed twice through the body of the valiant
soldier, and the medal of the Legion of Honor conferred upon him by his
imperial majesty the Emperor of France.

Some painful doubts in regard to the truth of Captain de Banyan's
remarkable experience were beginning to intrude themselves into his mind;
and it is quite probable that he would have been hurled into an unhappy
state of skepticism, if the train in which he was riding had not been
suddenly hurled down an embankment some twenty feet in height, where the
cars were piled up in shapeless wrecks, and human beings, full of life
and hope a moment before, were suddenly ushered into eternity, or maimed
and mangled for life.


CHAPTER II

THE SENATOR'S DAUGHTER


A scene terribly beyond the power of description was presented to the
gaze of Lieutenant Somers when he recovered his scattered senses. The car
had been literally wrenched to pieces, and the passengers were partially
buried beneath the fragments. Our traveler was stunned by the shock, and
made giddy by the wild vaulting of the car as it leaped down the
embankment to destruction. He was bruised and lacerated; but he was not
seriously injured. He did not make the mistake which many persons do
under such trying circumstances, of believing that they are killed; or,
if their senses belie this impression, that they shall die within a brief
period.

Lieutenant Somers was endowed with a remarkable degree of self-possession,
and never gave up anything as long as there was any chance of holding on.
He saw a great many stars not authenticated in any respectable catalogue
of celestial luminaries. His thoughts, and even his vitality, seemed to be
suspended for an instant; but the thoughts came back, and the stream of
life still flowed on, notwithstanding the rude assault which had been made
upon his corporal frame.

Finding that he was not killed, he struggled out from beneath the wreck
which had overwhelmed him. His first consideration, after he had assured
himself that he was comparatively uninjured, was for those who were his
fellow-passengers on this race to ruin and death; and perhaps it is not
strange that the fair young lady who had occupied the opposite seat in
the car came to his mind. Men and women were disengaging themselves from
the shapeless rubbish. Some wept, some groaned, and some were motionless
and silent.

He did not see the fair stranger among those who were struggling back to
consciousness. A portion of the top of the car lay near him, which he
raised up. It rested heavily upon the form of a maiden, which he at once
recognized by the dress to be that of the gentle stranger. The sight
roused all his energies; and he felt that strength which had fired his
muscles when he trod the field of battle. With desperate eagerness, he
raised the heavy fragment which was crowding out the young life of the
tender form, and bore it away, so that she was released from its cruel
pressure.

She, poor girl! felt it not; for her eyes were closed, and her marble
cheek was stained with blood. The young officer, tenderly interested in
her fate, bent over her, and raised the inanimate form. He bore it in his
arms to a green spot, away from the scattered fragments of the train, and
laid it gently down upon the bosom of mother earth. By all the means
within his power, he endeavored to convince himself that death had not
yet invaded the lovely temple of her being. But still she was silent and
motionless. There was not a sign by which he could determine the
momentous question.

He was unwilling to believe that the beautiful stranger was dead. It
seemed too hard and cruel that one so young and fair should be thus
rudely hurried out of existence, without a mother or even a father near
to receive her last gaze on earth, and listen to the soft sigh with which
she breathed forth her last throb of existence. He had a telescopic
drinking-cup in his pocket, with which he hastened to a brook that flowed
through the valley. Filling it with water, he returned to his charge. He
sprinkled her face, and rubbed her temples, and exerted himself to the
best of his knowledge and ability to awaken some signs of life.

The task seemed hopeless; and he was about to abandon it in despair, to
render assistance to those who needed it more than the fair, silent form
before him, when an almost imperceptible sigh gladdened his heart, and
caused him to renew his exertions. Procuring another cup of water, he
persistently sprinkled the fair face and chafed the temples of his
charge. With his handkerchief he washed away the blood-stains, and
ascertained that she was only slightly cut just above the ear.

Cheered by the success which had rewarded his efforts, he continued to
bathe and chafe till the gentle stranger opened her eyes. In a few
moments more she recovered her consciousness, and cast a bewildered
glance around her.

"Where is my father?" said she; and, as she spoke, the fearful nature of
the catastrophe dawned upon her mind, and she partially rose from her
recumbent posture.

Lieutenant Somers could not tell where her father was, and his first
thought was that he must be beneath the wreck of the shattered cars. For
the first time, he looked about him to measure with his eye the extent of
the calamity. At that moment he discovered the engine, with the forward
part of the train, backing down the railroad. Only the two rear cars had
been precipitated over the embankment; the accident having been caused by
the breaking of an axle on the last car but one. The shackle connecting
this with the next one had given way, and the broken car had darted off
the bank, carrying the rear one with it, while the rest of the train
dashed on to its destination.

Of course the calamity was immediately discovered; but a considerable
time elapsed--as time was measured by those who were suffering and dying
beneath the _débris_ of the train--before the engine could be stopped,
and backed to the scene of the accident. Lieutenant Somers had seen the
lady's father go forward, and had heard him say he was going to the
smoking-car; he was therefore satisfied that he was safe.

"He will be here presently," he replied to the anxious question of the
fair stranger.

"Perhaps he was--oh, dear! Perhaps he was----"

"Oh, no! he wasn't. The smoking-car was not thrown off the track,"
interposed the young officer, promptly removing from her mind the
terrible fear which took possession of her first conscious moments. "Are
you much hurt?"

"I don't know; I don't think I am; but one of my arms feels very numb."

"Let me examine it," continued our traveler, tenderly raising the injured
member.

He was not deeply skilled in surgery; but he knew enough of the mysteries
of anatomy to discover that the arm was broken between the elbow and the
shoulder.

"I am afraid your arm is broken," said he cautiously, as though he feared
the announcement would cause her to faint again.

"I am glad it is no worse," said she with a languid smile, and without
exhibiting the least indication of feminine weakness.

"It might have been worse, certainly. Can I do anything more for you?"
added Lieutenant Somers, glancing at the wreck of the cars, with a
feeling that his duty then was a less pleasing one than that of attending
to the wants of the beautiful stranger; for there were still men and
women lying helpless and unserved in the midst of the ruins.

The train stopped upon the road; and the passengers, though appalled by
the sight, rushed down the bank to render willing assistance to the
sufferers. Among them was the father of the young lady, who leaped
frantically down the steep, and passed from one to another of the forms
which the survivors had taken from the wreck.

"There is your father," said Lieutenant Somers as he recognized him among
the excited passengers. "I will go and tell him where you are."

"Do, if you please," replied the lady faintly.

He ran to the distracted parent, and seized him by the arm as he dashed
from one place to another in search of the gentle maiden whose life was
part of his own.

"Your daughter is out here, sir," said Lieutenant Somers, pointing to the
spot where he had borne her.

"My daughter!" gasped the agonized father. "Where--where?"

"In this direction, sir."

"Is she--O Heaven, spare me!" groaned he.

"She is hurt, but I think not very badly. Her left arm is broken, and her
head is slightly cut."

"O God, I thank Thee!" gasped the father, as he walked with the
lieutenant to the place where the young lady was sitting on the grass.

"I think you need not be alarmed about her," added our officer, anxious
to console the suffering parent.

"My poor Emmie!" exclaimed the anxious father when they reached the spot,
while he knelt down upon the grass by her side, the tears coursing in
torrents down his pale cheeks.

"Don't be alarmed, father," replied she, putting her uninjured arm around
his neck and kissing him, while their tears mingled. "I am not much hurt,
father."

Lieutenant Somers had a heart as well as a strong and willing arm, and he
could not restrain his own tears as he witnessed the touching scene. The
meeting seemed to be so sacred to him, that he could not stand an idle
gazer upon the expression of that hallowed affection as it flowed from
the warm hearts of the father and daughter.

"As I can be of no further service here, I will go and do what I can for
those who need my help. If you want any assistance, I shall be close at
hand," said he, as he walked away to the busy scene of woe which
surrounded the wreck.

The wounded, the maimed, and the dead were rapidly taken from the pile of
ruins, and placed in the cars on the road; and there was no longer
anything for the young officer to do. He returned to the grassy couch of
her whom he could not but regard as peculiarly his patient. The father
had recovered his self-possession, and satisfied himself that Emmie was
not more seriously injured than her deliverer had declared.

"My young friend, while I thank God that my daughter is still alive, I am
very grateful to you for the care you have bestowed upon her," said the
father, as he grasped the young officer's hand.

"You may well thank him, Mr. Guilford," said one of the two gentlemen who
had followed the young officer to the spot; "for the first thing I saw,
when I came out from under the ruins, was this young man lifting half the
top of the car off your daughter."

"I beg your pardon, sir, but I think we should convey the young lady up
to the cars; for I see they are about ready to start," said Lieutenant
Somers, blushing up to the eyes.

"I thank you, young man," added Mr. Guilford with deep feeling. "I must
see you again, and know more about you. Emmie has told me how kind you
have been to her; and you may be sure I shall never forget it while I
live. How do you feel now, Emmie?"

"My arm begins to pain me a little," she answered languidly.

"We must put you into the car, and in a short time we shall be able to do
something for you."

"I will carry her up to the train, sir," said the young officer.

"I thank you, sir," said Emmie with a smile; "but I think I can walk."

"Well," said the gentleman who had spoken before, "I saw him carry you
from the wreck to this place; and I am bound to say, I never saw a mother
handle her baby more tenderly."

"I am very grateful to him for what he has done for me," added Emmie with
a slight blush; "and if I needed his services, I certainly should accept
his kind offer."

She took the arm of her father, and walked very well till she came to the
steep bank, whose ascent required more strength than she then possessed.
Her father and Lieutenant Somers then made a "hand-chair," and bore her
up to the car, in which she was as comfortably disposed as the
circumstances would permit. The train started with its melancholy freight
of wounded, dead and dying.

"I see, sir, you are an officer in the army," said Mr. Guilford as the
train moved off; "but I have not yet learned your name."

"Thomas Somers, sir," replied our young officer.

"I must trouble you to write it down for me, with your residence when at
home, and your regiment in the field."

Lieutenant Somers complied with this request, and in return the gentleman
gave him his address.

"I shall never forget you, Lieutenant Somers," said Mr. Guilford when he
had carefully deposited the paper in his memorandum-book. "I have it in
my power to be of service to you; and if you ever want a friend, I shall
consider it a favor if you will come to me, or write to me."

"Thank you, sir; I am very much obliged to you. But I hope you won't
consider yourself under any obligations to me for what I have done. I
couldn't have helped doing it if I had tried."

"Lieutenant Somers, you are in luck," said the gentleman who had
accompanied him before. "That is Senator Guilford, of ----, and he will
make a brigadier-general of you before you are a year older."


CHAPTER III

A FRIEND AT COURT


Lieutenant Somers sat down in one corner of the car, near the seats
occupied by Miss Guilford and her father. He was just beginning to be
conscious of the fact that he had done a "big thing;" not because he had
helped one of God's suffering creatures, but because she happened to be a
Senator's daughter. But he still had the happy reflection, that what he
had done had been prompted by motives of humanity, not by the love of
applause, or for the purpose of winning the favor of a great man who
could dispense the "loaves and fishes" when he should need them.

He was rather sensitive. He was a young man of eighteen, and he had not
yet become familiar with the grossness and selfishness of this
calculating world. He was rather offended at the patronage which the
Senator had proposed to bestow upon him, and he even regretted that he
had so readily given him his address.

Lieutenant Somers regarded himself as emphatically a fighting officer;
and the idea of working his way up to distinction by the favor of a
member of Congress was repulsive to him. He really wished the Hon. Mr.
Guilford had only thanked him for what he had done, and not said a word
about having it in his power to be of service to him.

While he was meditating upon the events which had transpired, and the
Senator's patronizing offer, he saw Captain de Banyan enter the forward
door of the car through which the gentleman who had taken so much pains
to compliment the young officer had disappeared a short time before. The
distinguished captain walked through the car directly to the seat of the
lieutenant, who had not even yet ceased to blush under the praises which
had been bestowed upon him.

"Somers, your hand," said he, extending his own. "I have heard all about
it, and am proud that our regiment has furnished so brave and devoted a
man. Oh, don't blush, my dear fellow! You are a modest man. I sympathize
with you; for I am a modest man myself. I didn't get over blushing for
three weeks after his imperial majesty, the Emperor of France,
complimented me for some little thing I did at the battle of Palestro."

"I thought that was at Magenta," added Somers.

"So it was. The fact is, I have been in a great many battles, and I get
them mixed up a little sometimes. But you are in luck, Somers," continued
the captain in a lower tone, as he seated himself by the side of his
fellow-officer.

"Why so?"

"They say she is the daughter of a Senator."

"What of that?"

"What of that! Why, my dear fellow, you are as innocent as a school girl.
Don't you see he can get you on some general's staff, and have you
promoted every time there is a skirmish?"

"I don't want to be promoted unless I earn it."

"Of course you don't; but every officer that earns it won't get it. By
the way, Somers, can't you introduce me to the old gentleman?"

"I never saw him before in my life."

"No matter for that. I'll warrant you, he'll be glad to make all your
friends his friends."

"But I don't feel enough acquainted with him to introduce a gentleman
whom I never saw in my life till two hours ago."

"You are right, my dear fellow; excuse me," replied Captain de Banyan,
looking very much disappointed. "I dare say, if I should show him the
autograph of the Emperor of France, he would be very glad to know me."

"No doubt of it. At any rate, I recommend you to make the trial."

"Yes; but the mischief of it is, I have left all those papers at home."

"That's unfortunate," added Lieutenant Somers, who had some serious
doubts in regard to the existence of those papers.

"So it is. If I had been lucky enough to have made the acquaintance of
that young lady, as you have, I would not let my aspirations stop short
of the stars of a major-general."

"You need not as it is, if you do your duty."

"Ah! my dear fellow, you are as sentimental as a girl of sixteen. I am a
modest man; but, in my estimation, there are ten thousand men in the army
as good as I am. They can't all be major-generals, can they?"

"Certainly not."

"Then, if you live a few months longer, you will find out how good a
thing it is to have a friend at court. You are a modest young man; but I
suppose you think there isn't another man in the army who is quite your
equal, and that your merit and your bravery will make a brigadier of you
in less than a year. It's a good thing to think so; but----"

"I don't think so. That would be modesty with a vengeance."

"I was a sentimental boy like you once, and I was just as certain that I
should be made a field-marshal, and have the command of the French army
in the Crimea----"

"I thought you were in the English army in the Crimea," interposed the
young lieutenant, eager to change the subject.

"Certainly, in the English army; that's what I said," continued the
gallant captain, entirely unmoved by the interruption. "I was just as
sure of having the command of the British army in the Crimea as you are
of becoming a brigadier by the time we get into Richmond. But I have no
friends at court as you have now."

"I never thought of such a thing as being a brigadier," protested Somers.
"I never even expected to become a second lieutenant."

"It isn't much to be a brigadier. I served with 'Old Rosey' in West
Virginia for a time. We had a captain there who didn't know any more
about military than a swine does about Lord Chesterfield's table
etiquette. He went into action with a cane in his hand, hawbucking his
company about just as a farmer does a yoke of cattle. That fellow is a
brigadier-general now; and there's hope for you and me, if we can only
have a friend at court."

"I am higher now than I ever expected to be, and I wouldn't give a straw
for fifty friends at court."

"That's because you are sentimental; but you'll get over that."

"Lieutenant Somers," said Senator Guilford, who had risen from his seat,
and approached that occupied by the two officers, "I shall leave the
train at the next stopping-place, in order to procure proper medical
attendance for my daughter. I desire again to express my thanks to you
for the signal service you have rendered to my daughter."

Our hero blushed again, and stammered out some deprecatory remark.

"When you are in Washington, you must call and see me. You must promise
this for Emmie's sake, if not for mine," added the Senator.

"I should be very happy to call," replied the young officer.

"My friend Lieutenant Somers is as bashful as a maiden of sweet sixteen,"
interposed Captain de Banyan. "I beg your pardon, Mr. Guilford; though
your name and fame are familiar to me, I have not the honor of your
personal acquaintance; but, under the circumstances, I shall make it part
of my duty to see that my friend does not neglect your reasonable
request."

"Thank you, sir," replied the Senator.

"Captain de Banyan, at your service," added the modest officer who had
served in Italy and the Crimea.

"Thank you, Captain de Banyan. I see you are in the same regiment with
Lieutenant Somers."

"Yes, sir, I have that honor; and I assure you there is not a nobler and
braver young officer in the Army of the Potomac. He reminds me very much
of a splendid fellow I served with in the Crimea."

"Ah! you were in the Crimea?"

"I was, sir; and he looks very much like Captain de Waite, whom I saw
made a major on the field of Magenta, for the most daring bravery, by the
Emperor of France."

"You have seen service, captain," added the Senator.

"A little, sir."

"You must speak with my daughter, lieutenant, before we part," continued
Mr. Guilford. "Her gratitude has no limit."

Lieutenant Somers was astounded by the effrontery of his military
companion, who had claimed to be his friend, and forced himself upon the
acquaintance of the powerful man on the strength of that intimacy; had
even brought to his notice the fact--if it was a fact--that he had been
at Magenta and in the Crimea. The simple-minded young man had seen no
such diplomacy in Pinchbrook, or in the course of his travels in Maryland
and Virginia; and he was fearful that the audacious fellow would dare to
address the daughter as he had the father.

"Be seated," said the Senator, as he pointed to the seat in front of Miss
Emmie.

She was pale, and appeared to be suffering from the pain of her broken
arm; but she bestowed a sweet smile upon him as he took the proffered
seat.

"Lieutenant Somers, after what I have heard from Mr. Holman"--that was
the gentleman who had spoken so handsomely of him--"I feel sure that I
owe my life to you."

"I think not, Miss Guilford," replied the lieutenant, very much
embarrassed. "I only pulled you out from the ruins; I couldn't have
helped doing it if I had tried; and I hope you won't feel under any
obligations to me."

"But I do feel under very great obligations to you, and I assure you I am
happy to owe my life to so brave and gallant a soldier."

Somers felt just as though he was reading an exciting chapter in a
sensational novel; though he could not help thinking of Lilian Ashford,
and thus spoiling all the romance of the affair. He made no reply to Miss
Emmie's pretty speech; it was utterly impossible for him to do so; and
therein he differed from all the heroes of the novels.

"I want to hear from you some time, and even to see you again. You must
promise to call and see me when we get to Washington."

"I may not be able to leave my regiment at that time."

"Oh! my father will get you a furlough any time you want one."

Lieutenant Somers thought he would like to see himself asking a furlough
to enable him to visit a young lady in Washington, even if she was a
Senator's daughter; but he promised to call at Mr. Guilford's whenever he
happened to be at the capital, which was entirely satisfactory to the
young lady. Though Emmie was by this time suffering severely, she managed
to say several pleasant things; and among them she hinted that her father
could make a brigadier as easily as a tinker could make a tin kettle.

The train arrived at the stopping-place; and Mr. Guilford, with the
assistance of Lieutenant Somers, placed his daughter in a carriage.
Captain de Banyan was very anxious to assist in the operation; but the
sufferer declined. They parted with a renewed promise on the part of the
young officer to visit her in Washington, whenever his duty called him to
that city. The cars arrived in New York two hours behind time--too late
to connect with the train for Philadelphia. Captain de Banyan proposed,
as they were obliged to remain in the city over night, that they should
stop at the "Fifth Avenue," declaring that it was the best hotel in New
York. Somers objected; hoping that he should thus escape the society of
the captain, who appeared to be altogether too "fast" for his time.

De Banyan was accommodating; and, when the lieutenant mentioned a small
hotel downtown, he readily agreed to the proposition, and Somers found it
useless to attempt to get rid of him. The captain, for some reason or
other, appeared to have taken a decided liking to our officer. Perhaps he
hoped to share with him the powerful patronage of Senator Guilford.

After supper, Captain de Banyan proposed that they should go out and see
the "elephant;" but Somers, having no taste for the study of this
description of natural history, positively declined to see the
metaphorical monster.

"We must go somewhere," persisted the captain, taking up a newspaper.
"Here's a 'Lecture on the Battle of Bull Run, by Lieutenant-Colonel
Staggerback, who participated in that memorable action,'" he continued,
reading from the paper.

"I was in that battle myself; I don't object to that," replied Somers.

"Good! Then we'll go."

They walked up Broadway till they came to one of those gaudy saloons
where rum and ruin are tricked out in the gayest of colors.

"We are early for the lecture, Somers. Let's go in here, and see what
there is to be seen."

"No, I thank you; I don't care about going into any of these dens of vice
and sin."

               "'Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
               As, to be hated, needs but to be seen,'"

repeated the captain with dramatic force.

                        "'But seen too oft----'

You needn't see it but once. Don't you want to see the lions of the
metropolis?"

"Don't object to the lions; but, in my opinion, you will find only the
donkeys in there."

"Let us see, at any rate."

"I will go in for a moment," replied Somers, who did not like to seem
over-squeamish.

They entered this outer gate to ruin. There was a bar at the end next to
the street, while at the other end a band of music was playing the
national airs. It looked like a very pleasant place to the young
lieutenant, who had never entered one of these saloons before.


CHAPTER IV

THE FIRE OF TEMPTATION


Captain de Banyan sauntered gracefully up the saloon, with Somers at his
side. He appeared to be perfectly at home, and to have all the ease and
finish of a thorough man of the world. His movements were calculated to
make a sensation; and, as he passed along, old topers and gay young
bloods paused to glance at him. If the captain had been in command of the
Army of the Potomac, his elevated position would hardly have justified a
more extensive flourish than he made.

Lieutenant Somers was duly impressed by the magnificence of his
companion, though the surroundings of the place created some painful
misgivings in his mind. The captain sat down at one of the little tables
where the frequenters of the saloon who were disposed to prolong the
enjoyment of their drams discussed "juleps," "cobblers," and other
villainous compounds.

Somers could not do less than seat himself at the other side of the
table. He was ill at ease, even while he was endeavoring to seem
indifferent and at home. I am sorry to say he was haunted by that
abominable bugbear which often takes possession of the minds of young men
when they find themselves in the presence of those who are adepts in the
arts of vice--a fear of being thought "green," "verdant," or being
measured by some other adjective used in fast circles to caricature the
innocence of a soul unsullied by contact with the vices and follies of
the city. He half expected that some of the dissolute young wretches who
were drinking, swearing, and pouring the filth of a poisoned mind from
their lips, would ask him if "his mother knew he was out." He tried to
maintain his self-possession, and to seem at home where ruin was rioting
in the souls of young men. If he did not entirely succeed, it was all the
more to his credit.

"What will you take?" demanded Captain de Banyan, after they had sat at
the table long enough to examine the prominent features of the saloon.

"Take a walk," replied Lieutenant Somers.

"No, no! What will you drink?"

"Nothing, thank you. I've just been to supper, and don't want anything."

"Yes; but people who come in here, and listen to the music, are expected
to patronize the establishment. I'm going to have a brandy smash: shall I
order one for you?"

"No, I thank you."

"But I can't drink alone."

"I never drink."

"Nonsense! A lieutenant in our regiment, and not drink! I see! You
haven't learned yet; but it won't take you long. Your case is exactly my
own. I was about your age when I went to the Crimea, and didn't know wine
from brandy. After the battle of Balaclava, where I did some little thing
which excited the admiration of the nobs in command, Lord Raglan sent for
me, and invited me to take a glass of wine with him. Of course, I could
not refuse his lordship, especially as he was in the very act of
complimenting me for what he was pleased to call my gallant conduct. I
drank my first glass of wine then. It was Sicily Madeira, and light,
sweet wine; and, my dear fellow, you shall begin with the same, and we
will drink the health of Senator Guilford and his fair daughter. Waiter,
one brandy smash and one Sicily Madeira."

"Really, Captain de Banyan, you must excuse me," stammered Somers,
completely bewildered by the eloquent and insinuating manners of his
brilliant companion, who had spoken loud enough to attract the attention
of a dozen idlers greedy for excitement of any kind, and to whom the
latter part of his remarks seemed to be addressed, rather than to the
timid young man in front of him.

Captain de Banyan appeared to have a point to carry; which was nothing
less than to overcome the conscientious scruples of the young officer. He
had spoken loud enough to attract the attention of these miserable
tipplers, that Somers might be over-awed by their presence, and
intimidated by their sneers, and thus compelled to taste the intoxicating
cup. The squad of fast men who had taken positions near the table were
interested in the scene, and impatient to see the pure soul tumbled from
its lofty eminence.

"Here's the nectar!" almost shouted the captain as the waiter placed the
drinks upon the table. "Wine for you; brandy for me. You will be promoted
to brandy one of these days, my boy, when your head is stronger and your
nerves stiffer. Lieutenant Somers, here's to the health of the patriot
statesman, Senator Guilford, and his lovely daughter;" and the captain
pushed aside the straw in the vile compound, and raised the glass to his
lips.

Somers was embarrassed at his position, and bewildered by the dashing
speeches of his companion. A dozen pair of leering eyes were fixed upon
him; a dozen mouths were wrinkled into sottish smiles, called up by his
sufferings at that critical moment. He reached forth his hand, and
grasped the slender stem of the wine-glass; but his arm trembled more
than that of the most hardened toper in the group before him. He had been
trembling in the presence of that squad of tyrants--those leer-eyed
grinning debauchees, who seemed to be opening the gate of hell, and
bidding him enter.

"Tom Somers," said the still small voice which had spoken to him a
thousand times before in the perils and temptations through which he had
passed, "you have behaved yourself very well thus far. You have been
promoted for bravery on the battlefield; and now will you cower in the
presence of this brilliant brawler, and these weak-minded, cowardly
tipplers? What would your mother say if she could see you now, with your
shaking hand fastened to the wine-cup? What would Lilian Ashford say?
Dare you drink the health of Emmie Guilford in such a place as this? You
should have smote the lips that mentioned her name in such a presence!"

He drew back his hand from the glass. His muscles tightened up, as they
had on the bloody field of Williamsburg. Tom Somers was himself again.

"Come, Somers, you don't drink," added the captain sarcastically.

"No, I thank you; I never drink," he answered resolutely, as he cast a
steady glance of pity and contempt at the bloated crew who had been
reveling in his embarrassment.

"You won't refuse now?"

"Most decidedly."

"Lieutenant Somers, I took you for a young man of pluck. I'm
disappointed. You will pardon me, my dear fellow; but I can't help
regarding your conduct as rather shabby."

"I never drink, as I have said before, and I do not intend to begin now.
If I have been shabby, I hope you will excuse me."

"Certainly I will excuse you, when you atone for your folly, and drink
with me."

The spectators laughed, and evidently thought the captain had made a
point.

"Then I can never atone for my folly, as you call it," replied Somers,
his courage increasing as the trial demanded it.

"What would Lord Raglan have said if I had refused to drink his Sicily
Madeira?"

"Very likely he would have said just what you said; but there would have
been no more sense in it then than now."

"Bully for young 'un!" said a seedy dandy, whose love of fancy drinks had
made a compromise with his love of dress.

"I will leave it to these gentlemen to decide whether I have not spoken
reason and good sense."

"I will leave you and these _gentlemen_ to settle that question to suit
yourselves, and I will bid you good-evening," said Somers, rising from
his chair.

The unpleasant emphasis which he placed upon the word "gentlemen" created
a decided sensation among the group of idlers; and, as he stepped from
behind the table, he was confronted by a young man with bloodshot eyes
and bloated cheeks, but dressed in the extreme of fashion.

"Sir, you wear the colors of the United States Army," said the juvenile
tippler; "but you can't be permitted to insult a gentleman with
impunity."

Lieutenant Somers wanted to laugh in the face of this specimen of
bar-room chivalry, for he forcibly reminded him of a belligerent little
bantam-rooster that paraded the barnyard of his mother's cottage at
Pinchbrook; but he was prudent enough not to give any further cause of
offense. Bestowing one glance at this champion of the tippler's coterie,
he turned aside, and attempted to move towards the door.

"Stop, sir," continued the young man, who plainly wanted to make a little
capital out of a fight, in defense of the dignity of his friends. "You
can't go without an apology, or--or a fight," added the bully, shaking
his head significantly, as he placed himself in front of the young
lieutenant.

"What am I to apologize for?" asked Somers.

"You insulted the whole party of us. You intimated that we were no
gentlemen."

"I haven't spoken to any of you since I came in," protested Somers. "I
never had anything to do with you, and I don't know whether you are
gentlemen or not."

"You hear that, gentlemen!" added the bully.

"I think I have said all that is necessary to say; with your leave I will
go," said Somers.

"Stop, sir!" snarled the young ruffian, putting his hand on the
lieutenant's collar.

"Take your hand off!" said he sternly.

The fellow complied.

"This thing has gone far enough, sir," said Captain de Banyan, stepping
between Somers and his assailant. "Lieutenant Somers is my friend; and,
if you put the weight of your little finger upon him, I'll annihilate you
quicker than I did a certain Austrian field-marshal at the battle of
Solferino. Gentlemen, permit me to apologize for my inexperienced friend
if he has uttered any indiscreet word."

"He must apologize!" blustered the young ruffian. "He says we are no
gentlemen. Let him prove it."

"You have proved it yourself, you little ape," replied the captain, as he
stepped up to the bar, and paid his reckoning, bestowing no more
attention upon the ruffled little bully than if he had been a very small
puppy; which perhaps he was not, by a strict construction of terms.

"I demand satisfaction!" roared the flashy little toper. "Apologize, or
fight!"

"Neither, my gay and festive lark," said the captain with abundant good
humor, as he took Somers's arm, and sauntered leisurely towards the door.
"Now, my dear fellow, we will go and hear what Lieutenant-Colonel
Staggerback has to say about the battle of Bull Run. I was in that
action, and rallied the Fire Zouaves when Colonel Ellsworth was killed."

"Colonel Ellsworth! He wasn't killed at Bull Run!" exclaimed Somers,
astonished beyond measure at the singular character which his companion
was developing.

"You are right; he was killed at Ball's Bluff."

"I think not; but were you at Bull Run?"

"Certainly I was. I was on General Frémont's staff."

"Were you, indeed? Whew!"

"What may be the precise meaning of that whistle? Do you think I was not
there?"

"Well, I don't remember to have seen you there?"

"Very likely you did not; but you will call to mind the fact, that things
were rather mixed up in that action. But never mind that: we will talk
those things over when we get down upon the Peninsula, and have nothing
else to think about. Do you really mean to say, my dear fellow, that you
never drink at all?"

"I do not."

"Well, I have heard of a man climbing up to the moon on a greased
rainbow; but I never heard of an officer before that didn't drink."

"I'm afraid you haven't been very careful in the choice of your
companions. I know a great many that never taste liquor under any
circumstances."

"It may be so; and I am willing to confess that I have found one. I
wouldn't have believed it before if I had read it in the Constitution of
the United States. I owe you an apology, then, for letting on in that
saloon. I didn't mean to hurt your feelings, my dear fellow; but I
thought you were joking."

"I hope you will not repeat the experiment, then; though I shall consider
myself fair game if I ever enter another rum-shop," replied Somers.

They proceeded to the place designated for the lecture; and Captain de
Banyan betrayed his interest in that memorable battle, where he had
served on the staff of General Frémont, by going to sleep before the
eloquent "participant" had got half-way through the exordium. Lieutenant
Somers listened attentively until he was satisfied that Colonel
Staggerback either was not in the battle, or that he had escorted "Bull
Run Russell" off the field.

When the lecture was finished, Somers awakened his edified companion, and
they returned to the hotel; though the captain hinted several times on
the way that the "elephant" could be seen to better advantage in New York
than in any other city in the Union. The young lieutenant had an utter
disgust for the elephant, and took no hints. Before he retired that
night, he thanked God, more earnestly and devoutly than usual, that he
had been enabled to pass unscathed through the fires of temptation. He
was still in condition to look his mother in the face.


CHAPTER V

ON THE SKIRMISH LINE


In the morning our travelers resumed their journey, more refreshed and in
better condition for service than if they had spent the evening in
chasing the "elephant" from one to another of the gilded dens of
dissipation with which the metropolis abounds. In spite of his errors and
sins, Somers could not help liking his dashing companion. He was a
dangerous person; but his enthusiasm was so captivating, that he could
not close his heart against him. But, while he liked the captain, he
hated his vices.

They stopped in Philadelphia only long enough to dine, and in Baltimore
only long enough for supper; arriving at Washington in the evening.
Captain de Banyan again proposed to "go round;" which, rendered into
unmistakable English, meant to visit the drinking-houses and
gambling-saloons of the city, to say nothing of worse places. Lieutenant
Somers had grown wise by experience; and no amount of persuasion could
induce him to leave the hotel. It was horrible to him to think of
spending even his leisure time in the haunts of dissipation, when his
country was bleeding from a thousand wounds; when his gallant comrades in
the Army of the Potomac were enduring peril and hardship in front of the
enemy. He had no taste for carousing at any time, and every fiber of his
moral nature was firmly set against the vices which lured on his reckless
companion.

Lieutenant Somers stayed at the hotel that evening, listening to the
conversation of the officers who had been at the front within a few days.
The great battle of Fair Oaks had been fought during his absence, and
there was every prospect that the most tremendous operations of the war
would soon commence. He listened with the deepest interest to the
accounts from the army, and needed none of the stimulus of the bar-room
or the gambling-saloon to furnish him with excitement. He was soon to be
an actor in the momentous events of the campaign; and the thought was
full of inspiration, and lifted him up from the gross and vulgar tastes
of his companion.

Before noon the next day, somewhat against the inclination of Captain de
Banyan, the two officers were on board a steamer bound down the river.
After some delays, they arrived at White House, on the Pamunkey River;
and then proceeded by railroad nearly to the camp of the regiment, at
Poplar Hill, in the very depths of White Oak Swamp.

"My blessed boy!" shouted Sergeant Hapgood when Lieutenant Somers
appeared in the camp.

The veteran rushed upon him, and, not content to shake his hand he
proceeded to hug him in the most extraordinary manner.

"I am glad to see you, Hapgood! How have you been since I left?" said
Somers.

"First-rate! Bless my withered old carcass, Tom, but I thought I never
should see you again. Why, Tom, how handsome you've grown! Well, you'll
be a brigadier one of these days, and there won't be a better-looking
officer on the field. Dear me, Tom---- Beg pardon; I forgot that you are
an officer; and I mustn't call you Tom any more."

"Never mind that, uncle," added Somers, laughing. "It would hardly be
good discipline for a sergeant to call an officer by a nickname; but we
will compromise, and you shall call me Tom when we are not on duty, and
there is no one within hearing."

"Compromise! Don't never use that word to me. After we fit the battle of
Bull Run, I gouged that word out of my dictionary. No, sir! You are a
leftenant now; and I shall allus call you Leftenant Somers, even if there
ain't nobody within ten mile of us."

"Just as you please, uncle; but, whatever you call me, we shall be just
as good friends as we ever were."

"That's so, Leftenant Somers."

"Precisely, Sergeant Hapgood."

"Now, what's the news in Pinchbrook?" asked the veteran.

But, before Somers had a chance to tell the news from home, he was
welcomed to the camp, and cheered, by officers and men; and his account
of what had transpired in Pinchbrook during his thirty days' furlough was
eagerly listened to by a large and attentive audience. He received in
return a full history of the regiment during his absence. Though the
narrative of sundry exciting events, such as forays upon pig-sties,
poultry-yards, and kitchen-gardens, was highly amusing, there was a tale
of sadness to tell--of deaths by disease and on the battlefield.

Many cheerful hearts that were beating with life and hope a few weeks
before, were now silent in the grave--the soldier's mausoleum in a
strange land. But soldiers have no time to weep over a dead past; they
must live in the hope of a glorious future; and when they had dropped a
tear to the memory of the noble and the true who had fallen on the field
or died in the hospital, victims of the pestilential airs of the swamp,
they laughed as merrily as ever, careless of Death's poised arrows which
were always aimed at them.

Captain de Banyan took his place in the regiment, where Somers found that
he was prodigiously popular, even after a few hours' acquaintance with
his new command; but who he was, where he came from, and how he had
procured his commission, was a mystery to officers and men. He told
tremendous stories about the Crimea and the Italian war; and now for the
first time intimated that he was the only survivor of the company which
led the advance at the storming of Chapultepec, in the Mexican war.
However much the officers enjoyed his stories, it is not probable that
all of them believed what they heard.

As in the past fifteen years in France had played, the rapid development
of socialist ideas, the June battle, the coup of Louis Bonaparte and his
demagogic exploitation of the workers against the liberal bourgeoisie, the
liberals had it advisable, perhaps similar incidents in Germany to prevent
. So they used the year 1860 from the urge of the workers after the
founding of the Workers' clubs, and promoted it on its tip them
reliably appearing to bring people searched. The economic development of
Germany had at that time made considerable progress, but it was still
Germany Mostly a little bourgeois and smallholder land.

Three-quarters of industrial workers belonged to the craft. With the
exception of the actual work in the heavy industry, mining, iron and
engineering industries, was the work of the factory handwerksmäßig
working Gesellen viewed with disdain. The products of the factory was
as cheap, but also as bad a stigma that is still sixteen years later,
the representative of Germany at the World Exposition in Philadelphia,
Privy Reuleaux, the German factory work aufdrückte.

For the craft journeymen was the factory worker as unterwertig, and as
a means to workers, rather than fellow accomplice, many saw as a
personal reduction. In addition, the vast majority of these companions
and assistants, nor the conviction that one day even be able to master,
including both in Saxony and other states at the beginning of the sixties,
the scope for freedom came. The political education of these workers was
very low. In the fifties, namely in the darkest years of the response
grew in political life where everything was erstorben, they had no
opportunity to put their political parties.

Workers' associations or clubs craftsmen, as they are often called, were
only occasionally present and serve all, not only of political enlightenment.
Workers' associations have been political in nature in most German
states, not even tolerated, they were even on the basis of a decision
of the Bundestag in 1856 banned because, according to the Bundestag in
Frankfurt was the club synonymous with workers spread of socialism
and communism. Socialism and communism, but again we were younger
at the time, completely alien concepts, Bohemian villages. Well were
here and there, for example, in Leipzig, isolated persons, such
as Fritzsche, Vahlteich, Schneider shilling, which is one of
Weitlingschen communism, even Weitling writings were read, but these
were exceptions.

That it was also working, for example, knew of the Communist Manifesto
and Marx's and Engels' work in the revolutionary years in the Rhineland
knew something which I have in that time nothing heard in Leipzig. It
follows that the workers were on was a position from which they neither
had a class interest, yet knew that there is no such thing as a
social issue there. Therefore, the workers flocked in droves to the
clubs, the liberal leaders helped found the workers as the People's
kindness Ausbund appeared.

These workers now shooting clubs in the early sixties from the ground
like mushrooms after a warm summer rain. Notably, in Saxony, but also
in the rest of Germany. There were places in clubs, where many years later,
it lasted until the socialist movement there was some ground,
although the former workers' club meanwhile had been received.

In Leipzig was a very active political life. Leipzig was one of the
headquarters of liberalism and democracy.

One day I read in the democratic "Mitteldeutsche Volkszeitung" to
which I subscribe, and the eight edited Dr.

Peters, the husband of the late well-known champion for women's rights
Luise Otto-Peters, an invitation to a People's Assembly to establish
an educational association.

This meeting took place on 19 February 1861 in Vienna Hall, a venue
that is near the Rose Garden in a stand.

When I stepped into the restaurant, the same was already overcrowded. With
effort, I found on the gallery space. It was the first public
meeting that I attended.

The President of the Polytechnic Society, Professor Dr.

Hirzel had the department, which announced that an Industrial
Education Association as the second division of the Polytechnical
Society wanted to establish, because workers' associations on the
basis of the Bundestag decision of 1856 in Saxony would not be
tolerated.

By contrast, opposition arose. Besides Roßmäßler professor who is a member
of the German Parliament in Frankfurt aM and that of his professorship
at the Academy of Forestry Tharandt by Mr von Beust gemaßregelt was
Vahlteich and Fritzsche took the floor and demanded full independence
of the association, which must be political.

The pursuit of educational purposes is the responsibility of the school,
not a club for adults. I was with these speakers do not agree, but
it impressed me that the workers learned gentlemen as strongly to the
body moved, and wished in quiet, so you can talk to. The association was
founded, and although the opposition has not had , she joined the
club in. I was also a member that evening. The club was in its way a model
institution. Lecturers for scientific Thematas were available in quantity.
So next Roßmäßler Professor, Professor Bock - the arbor-Bock, and
author of the book of healthy and sick people - the professors
Wuttke, Wenck, Marbach, Dr.

Lindner, Dr. Reyher, Dr. Burckhardt and others. Later Professor Biedermann,
Hans Blum, from which the legend was that he had during his student
days to his business card as a student of human rights means that,
Dr.

Eras, Liebknecht, in the summer of 1865 came to Leipzig, and Robert
Schweichel.

One of the most diligent lecturer in early years was Dr. Dammer,
later the first set of Lassalle Vice President of the General
German Workers' Association was.

Teaching was given in English, French, in shorthand, commercial
accounting, the German language and numeracy.

Also, a gymnastic and singing department was founded. The former occurs
when Vahlteich, a great gymnasts before the Lord was and remained, the
singing department came in and I Fritzsche. Vorzüglich Fritzsche sang
second bass, I first, we know everyone is singing, which has no voice.
At the head of the association was a vierundzwanzigköpfiger
Committee, in which the battle for the presidency erupted.

Roßmäßler subject to the architect Mothes, but the opposition has worked
to plan.

The first Stiftungsfest February 1862 held Vahlteich the speech,
which was pronounced politically.

He urged the general vote. In the election of the Committee, I was also
elected in the same.

My yearning to be able to talk publicly, was in the frequent debates
in the club was quickly satisfied.

A friend told me later that when I for the first time a few minutes said,
in order to justify an application, go to my desk, and another
asked: Who is he who shall occur. Since different departments within the
Committee for the various subjects were, I was in the library
department and the Department of amusements elected.

In both, I was chairman.

The choice of the club chairman, the committee again had to be called
this time a fierce battle out. Four was chosen without a candidate for a
multi-result. Always there was a tie. Finally, subject to re-architect
Professor Roßmäßler Mothes with one voice, because it itself had chosen.
The opposition was now fighting in the General Assembly, which
took place on Good Friday 1862.

The club had about five hundred members. The opposition put back their
old debt to the club to a purely political and to the lessons from
the same ruled out.

After a bitter, battle vielstündigen speech, in which I participated,
it was subject to a majority of three quarters of the votes.

Had the opposition skillful surgery, she would require that temporary
political lectures on time and on events held discussions should
be held, they would have won brilliantly.

But that is the lesson from the Association wanted to banish, for
the vast majority of the younger members had the greatest interest,
appealed to this resistance.

I myself took part in the bookkeeping and stenography participate. Some
days before that crucial meeting had Fritzsche Vahlteich and eager
to move me to them hinüberzuziehen.

I could not follow them.

The opposition now resigned and founded the club forward, the Hotel
de Saxe in his headquarters aufschlug.

The landlord in this restaurant was the reaction in the years
gemaßregelte former pastor Würkert. This had its own method, to spread
awareness and also his business.

He organized weekly lectures, which he himself did, about all
possible Thematas, such as births and deaths of famous men, political,
current events, etc.

On such evenings had pushed his local full. Then it like an original idea
if Würkert, just yet among the guests to move this and that and a glass
of beer was administered, on the staircase landing took place,
which from the upper to the lower local lead and then all of its
visible Lecture held.

Not unlike, but rather to supplement the meetings at the Hotel de
Saxe was the restoration to a good source on the Brühl, one was
built just big cellar bar, which the landlord was eight Grun.

In one corner of that place was a big round table, the table was
called criminals. It said that only the venerable chiefs of
democracy could take place leading to prison or jail or had been
obtained had gemaßregelt. Often met with both.

Since sat Roßmäßler, Dolge, due to its participation in the Maiaufstand
to death was sentenced, to life after prison and was pardoned for
eight years in Waldheim had sat.

The "criminals" were continued by Dr. Albrecht, who in our club taught
stenography, Dr. Burckhardt, Dr. Peters, Friedrich Oelkers, Dr. Fritz
Hofmann, arbor-called Hofmann, boys, etc.

We calculated it for us to honor special if we are at this table in the
company of the elderly to drink a glass of beer were allowed.

The head of the club forward but were content with their club meetings,
they wore the agitation in the workers and public gatherings, which
they from time to time einberiefen, in which Labor issues and daily
issues were discussed.

These discussions were still very unclear.

We discussed a disability insurance for workers, on the event of a world
exhibition in Germany, on entry into the National Association,
which is demanding that this annual contribution of 3 Mark in monthly
payments rise so that the workers could join.

Next we asked the general voting for the state and a German parliament,
which the workers have to question.

It was also the convening of a general German Workers' Congress debated
on which the claims emerged debate.

The question of convening a Congress workers appeared almost simultaneously
in Berlin and Nuremberg working circles. To their preparation to take
necessary and further expectant workers meeting, a committee was set
down in the next Fritzsche, Vahlteich and other less known workers,
I was elected.

In addition to the workers' meetings, which from our side went out,
summoned the local head of the German National People's Association
meetings more often, sometimes with speakers from abroad,
Schulze-Delitzsch, Metz-Darmstadt, etc., where the German question,
the creation of a German fleet, the meantime had become very acute
Prussian constitutional conflict, the question of Schleswig-holsteinsche
etc. were discussed.

Man ersieht already made the list this Thematas that the political
life in Leipzig at that time was an extremely busy and our breath
held.

A very popular theme in the interviews of the Liberal People's Assemblies
were also discussions on the Constitution states in the individual states,
especially in Saxony, Hesse-Kassel and Hesse-Darmstadt.

In the second place followed by Mecklenburg and Bavaria. The Lords v.
Beust (Saxony) and Dalwigk (Hesse-Darmstadt, Germany) were the subject
of particularly heavy attacks. These joined Mr. v. Bismarck, such as
in September 1862 at the head of the Prussian government came. It was
right in the aforementioned small and medium-sized countries have been
following the defeat of the constitutional revolution breaks and all
kinds Oktroyierungen occurred, but no less in Prussia. Moreover, these
small and medium-sized states their criminal activity only under
the protection of Prussia and Austria - the herein a heart and
soul were - can exercise.

Nevertheless, the liberals treated the different shades in their public
attacks, the Small and Medium-Sized States much worse than, for example,
Prussia. And yet, it was Prussia, which will niedergeworfen the Revolution
and in addition to the Oktroyierungen in their own land in acts of
violence against the revolutionaries did not have to miss. I remind
you of the Gottfried Kinkel sentence to life imprisonment, the
death of Adolf v.

Trützschler in Mannheim and Max Dortü in Freiburg iB, to the shootings in
the Kasemattengräben in Rastatt, to the terrible atrocities which the
Prussian army after the defeat of of Maiaufstandes in Dresden at
the captured revolutionaries he had committed.

Even were the state of Prussia in the fifties under the rule of the
system Manteuffel so that every man at the halfway freethinkers
aufstacheln had indignation and Prussia in Germany and abroad over
the worst discredited.

Even in the wake of the constitutional conflict are looked at his peers
in Germany in vain. Mir, which I had as a policy even in the inexperienced
young man had to apply, was the double standard soon. And this
was the Saxon name of Liberals and Democrats practiced.

However, the system was of the Lord v. Beust, this with the consent of
King Johann of Saxony was staged because of the grass roots
activities and oppression of all kinds and especially by the cruel
treatment of the political prisoners in jail to Waldheim had suffered,
especially and rightly hated.

He could not see anything without
standing up; and, as he was within twenty rods of the house, it was
necessary to avoid exposing himself.

From whatever source the sounds proceeded, it was just as safe to advance
as it was to retreat; and he decided to go forward. With the utmost
caution, he continued to creep along through the wheat; but he was
careful to assure himself that his men's muskets and his own revolver
were in condition for instant use. After he had gone a few rods farther,
the sounds were more apparent; and, with no little consternation, he
heard voices, rich with an unmistakable Southern accent.

"I tell you, more of our fellers is coming through the grain. You mought
hear 'em, ef you weren't deafer'n a dead nigger."

"I heerd 'em. You kin bet yer life they're some of our pickets.
Howsomever, I'm gwine to see."

"Hush, my men! don't speak a word!" whispered the young lieutenant. "Lie
flat on the ground."

The rebels were nearer than he had supposed; for, as he turned from his
men, he discovered a wiry grayback, with the chevrons of a sergeant on
his arms, trying to stare him out of countenance. The fellow did not look
wholesome; and Somers was in doubt whether to blow his brains out, or let
things take their natural course.

"Who mought you be?" demanded the grayback, exhibiting more curiosity
than of fear in his dirty face.

"One of the people," replied Somers, disposed to avoid a direct issue.
"Who are you?"

"I'm one of the people too," grinned the rebel.

"I see you are; and I suppose you belong to the army, don't you?"

"Bet your life I do."

"Of course you won't object to telling me which army you belong to, as
there may be some difference of opinion between us."

"'Tain't no use to ask a officer dressed in blue, and lookin' as spruce
as you be, whar he kim from. I say, Yank, what are you uns doin' in
hyar?"

"Only taking a look."

"You're as civil as a Mobile dancin'-master; and I axes yer, very
perlite, to surrender."

"How many men have you got, reb?" demanded the lieutenant, as he put his
hand on his revolver.

"See hyar, Yank; play fair. You uns allers cheat playin' poker. Don't
tech yer shooter yet," replied the grayback coolly, as he thrust the
muzzle of his gun in the lieutenant's face. "Two kin play at that game,
and your wife or mine will be a lone widder quicker'n a coon kin wink at
the moon. I've got seven men," he added.

"I have twenty-three," said Somers.

"Then yer kin whip us if yer be Yanks; for three of you uns can just lick
one of we uns."

"That's good logic. Will you surrender, or fight?" demanded Somers.

"Let me count your men. I surrender," he continued, after he had stood
up, and counted the Union soldiers. "Here's my shooter; fair play, even
with Yanks."

Leaving a guard of eight men with his prisoners when they were disarmed,
Somers hastened forward to complete his mission.


CHAPTER VII

AN EXPEDITION IN FRONT


The affair in the wheat-field had been conducted very quietly, and
apparently had not attracted the attention of any of the rebels in the
vicinity. During the brief parley, the thunder of the battle had sounded
on the right and left of the parties. The enemy were in force in their
works, and it was believed that there were squads of pickets in every
place of concealment which the ground afforded.

Somers was very much surprised to find that he was not molested, and made
all possible haste to carry out the programme with which he had been
intrusted by Captain de Banyan. Followed by the balance of his men, he
crept carefully towards the house till he had reached the end of the
grain-field. He could see about a dozen rebels skulking behind the
building, all of them so intent upon getting a shot at the Union
soldiers, that they paid no attention to the events transpiring in the
rear of them; probably deeming it impossible for an enemy to approach in
that direction.

The lieutenant had but fifteen men left to execute his part of the
scheme, and there seemed to be double that number of graybacks lurking in
and about the house. Everything depended upon his effecting the requisite
junction with the force of the captain. As his superior had but a short
distance to march, it was probable that he was already in position to
support him; and he decided to make the attack without permitting any
delay to rob him of the chances of success.

"Now, double-quick, forward!" shouted Somers, as he rose from the ground,
and led the way to a position where he could intercept the retreat of the
rebels.

Agreeably to the instructions previously given, his men stretched out
into an extended line, and commenced firing at will upon the luckless
graybacks who were in sight. It did not take them long to find out that
they were assailed by a fire in the rear.

"Surrender!" shouted Captain de Banyan, who at this moment appeared at
the head of his men.

The rebels were not disposed to accept this polite invitation, but began
to fall back from the house in good order. They discharged their pieces
at the force in front, and then started at a run to effect their escape
in the opposite direction. They forgot for the moment that they had been
fired upon from the rear, or else thought that the fire had been directed
by some of their own people at the Yankees who had so suddenly attacked
in front.

"Surrender!" shouted Lieutenant Somers, as the retreating rebels
approached his line.

They halted at this unexpected summons. The officer in command of them
took a hasty survey of the situation, and then ordered his troops to cut
their way through the thin line between them and the rebel field-works.
The commander of the rebel pickets was a gallant fellow; and, drawing his
sword, he rushed towards the spot where the lieutenant was stationed.
Discharging his pistol with the left hand at Somers, he dashed forward
like a festive horse.

Both parties had discharged their guns, and there was no time to reload
them. Some of the rebels had bayonets, and some had not; and, with the
fury of their brave leader, they attempted to break their way through the
line. A sharp but very irregular conflict ensued, the rebels clubbing
their muskets or grappling with the Union soldiers, each according to his
individual taste. As they were two to one of the Federals, they would
certainly have won the field if Captain de Banyan had not promptly come
to the rescue.

The excited rebel officer manifested a most persistent desire to revenge
his misfortunes upon Lieutenant Somers. After he had fired his pistol
twice, and one of the balls had passed through his opponent's cap, the
latter, by a sudden dash, knocked the weapon from his hand with his
sword. He then attempted to use his own sword, and, if Somers had not
been a "master of fence," would probably have run him through the body.
Some hard blows were struck with these weapons, and the age of chivalry,
when men fought hand to hand with trusty blades, seemed to be revived.
But the sword of the rebel officer was not so trusty as it ought to have
been. It was not a regulation sword; and, while its owner was flourishing
it most valiantly, the blade flew away from the handle.

"Now, surrender!" said Somers, out of breath with the violence of his
exertions, as he drew from his belt the pistol which, being so hard
pressed, he had not been able to use before.

"Never, sir! I don't surrender! I was sent here to fight, and not to
surrender!" replied the officer, as proudly as though he had been in
command of a beleaguered fortress, instead of a squad of two or three
dozen men.

Somers had him at his mercy, and it seemed but little better than murder
to shoot him in his defenseless state.

That was a bad mistake on his part; for the rebel officer at once
proceeded to prove that he was no effeminate character, who depended upon
a sword, pistol, or other weapon, to fight his battles with, but could,
if occasion required, defend himself with his naked arm. He sprang upon
Somers with the ferocity of a tiger. The latter fired; but the sudden
movement of the former impaired his aim, and the ball whistled harmlessly
over the head of the rebel. The desperate officer attempted to gain
possession of the pistol; but Somers, now thoroughly aroused to a sense
of his own danger, sprang at the throat of his antagonist, and, by the
fierceness of the dash, bore him to the earth. His victim struggled to
escape; and, being a stronger man than the other, would certainly have
succeeded, if Somers had not picked up his pistol, which lay on the spot
where they fell, and struck a blow with the butt of it on the temple of
the rebel. This effectually quieted him; but the lieutenant's little
force were falling back before the furious assaults of the graybacks.

He had only time to get up before the rebels were upon him. At this
interesting and critical moment, Captain de Banyan came up with his large
force; and the enemy, finding themselves pressed in front and rear, gave
up in despair. They were disarmed; and, those from the wheat-field being
brought forward, the whole squad were marched in the direction of the
Union line.

About one-half of Somers's men were wounded, though some but slightly.
These were sent back. The rebel officer lay insensible upon the ground;
but Somers, satisfied that he was only stunned, desired to carry him off,
not only as a trophy of his prowess, but because such a desperate fellow
would be less dangerous in a prison-camp than in the lines of the rebels.
He directed two of his men to bear the insensible form to the house,
whither they were followed by the remainder of the force.

"Somers, my dear fellow, give me your hand," said Captain de Banyan, as
soon as the pressing business of the moment had been disposed of. "You
have covered yourself with glory."

"Pooh!" replied Somers, trying to look indifferent. "I have only done my
duty, and obeyed my orders."

"That's very true; but, if you had been weak in the knees, you couldn't
very well have obeyed orders. Somers, you have done a big thing; and, in
my judgment, you ought to be promoted."

"Promoted for that?"

"In the battle of Magenta----"

"Oh, confound the battle of Magenta!" exclaimed Somers, interrupting him.
"I will give you a handsome present if you will never say Magenta to me
again."

"Don't be petulant, my dear boy! You have got a sweet temper naturally,
and I hope you won't spoil it."

"I am afraid you will spoil it for me."

"I was only saying pleasant things to you, and you fly off and roll
yourself up in your dignity like a little hedgehog. By the way, Somers,
don't you suppose that Senator Guilford will hear of this affair?"

"I hope not."

"Nor that little lady we left all used up with a broken arm?"

"I don't care whether she does or not."

"Or that other little lady who knits socks for soldiers that don't run
away in battle?"

Somers blushed like a maiden, and his experienced companion saw that he
had touched the tender spot in his heart. Very likely the captain would
have said something more on this interesting subject, if the conversation
had not been interrupted by their arrival at the old house. Here they
were met by a messenger from the colonel, ordering the detachment to
hasten back; for orders had come for the brigade to retire to their old
position.

The wounded and the prisoners were conducted safely back to the line in
the woods, where our party were warmly congratulated upon their decided
success. The brigade fell back, but were immediately ordered forward
again, and held the advanced position which had been so gallantly won. It
was not a very comfortable place; for the soldiers stood over shoes in
the water. Late in the evening, our regiment was relieved by another, and
ordered back to the breastworks in the rear. It had lost but few men,
though torrents of loyal blood had flowed on that eventful day.

The action of that day was the initial conflict of the seven-days'
battles. General McClellan actually commenced his long-deferred
operations against the city of Richmond. But the favorable moment had
passed by, and even then the battalions of the rebels were gathering in
readiness to be hurled upon our devoted army. While the regiment, whose
fortunes have been more intimately connected with our story, was retiring
from the pestiferous swamp, the commanding general received information
of the approach of Stonewall Jackson. These proved to be sad tidings; for
the anticipated triumphal march into the rebel capital was changed into a
bloody but glorious retreat. The battles which were to be fought for a
victorious advance were made to cover a disastrous defeat--disastrous to
the campaign, though not to the army.

Fatigued, hungry and chilled by the night damps of the swamp, the
regiment threaded its way through the intricacies of the woods towards
the breastworks in the rear. It was a dark and gloomy hour, though the
_prestige_ of victory dwelt in the souls of the gallant soldiers. The
officers were not familiar with the ground; and with difficulty they
found their way back to the old line.

"Well, Somers, how do you feel?" asked Captain de Banyan when the
regiment was dismissed.

"I'm all worn out. I haven't got toughened to this kind of work yet,"
replied Somers.

"Don't give it up yet, my boy. We shall be in Richmond in less than a
week, and then we will take rooms at the Spottswood House, and have a
good time."

"Do you believe we shall ever get into Richmond, captain?"

"Certainly I do. Everything is working to my entire satisfaction. You
feel a little blue, my boy; but it is only because you are tired. You
will feel better in the morning."

"I am tired, but I am not blue. I am ready to do my duty, in victory or
defeat. There has been an awful roar of guns all day, and no one can tell
what the result of a battle will be."

"An awful roar of guns! 'Pon my word, I like that," laughed the captain.
"Why, at Magenta----"

"Magenta again!" sneered Somers, who was heartily sick of that word.

"Yes, at Magenta! If you could only have heard the guns there! Why, there
were seven thousand two hundred and forty-six pieces rattling away like
mad on our side alone; and I believe the Russians----"

"Russians at Magenta again! I don't believe you were at the battle of
Magenta any more than I was!" exclaimed Somers desperately.

"Do you mean to tell me that I lie?" asked the captain gravely.

"Go on with your story," said the lieutenant, fearing that he had said
too much.

"Answer my question, if you please. You gave me the lie; did you not?"

"No; I didn't use that word."

"You said you didn't believe I was at the battle of Magenta."

"To be perfectly candid with you, I don't believe it; but I am tired, and
want my supper," answered Somers, wishing to escape the issue which he
had provoked.

"Fair play, my boy. You charged me with lying--indirectly--but not the
less offensively on that account. Don't dodge the question."

"I haven't dodged it. I gave you my candid opinion that you were not
present at Magenta; and I don't think there is an officer in the regiment
who believes you were there."

"Isn't the word of an officer and a gentleman to be accepted?"

"Certainly, if he keeps within the bounds of reason; but when you talk
about the Russians at Magenta, and over seven thousand cannons in a
single army, we know that you are either 'drawing the long-bow,' or
laboring under some strange delusion. Supper is ready."

"We can eat and talk too." And they did. "May I be allowed to ask,
Lieutenant Somers, if you deem my statement inconsistent with reason?"

"To be sure I do. We have six guns to a battery; seventy-two hundred guns
would make twelve hundred batteries. We have about one hundred and fifty
men to a battery, which would make one hundred and eighty thousand men in
the artillery arm alone; which is positively ridiculous. You said
Russians----"

"Of course, that was a slip of the tongue. I meant Prussians," added the
captain, entirely overwhelmed by the lieutenant's arithmetic, as well as
by the laughter of Captain Benson and Lieutenant Munroe, who belonged to
the mess.

"Worse yet," said Somers. "They were Austrians. Now, captain, you are a
brave man, and a splendid fellow; but I think it is a great pity you
should tell such abominably great stories."

"I accept the apology," laughed Captain de Banyan. "We will call it
square, and turn in; for I think that we shall have hot work to-morrow."


CHAPTER VIII

AN ORDER FROM HEADQUARTERS


While Captain de Banyan and Lieutenant Somers were asleep, the commanding
general received the intelligence of a movement on our right by the
famous Stonewall Jackson. The position which had been gained by the
advance at Oak Grove was abandoned, and the troops returned to their old
line. The next day was heard the roar of the guns at Mechanicsville; and
on that succeeding was fought the battle of Gaines's Mills--the only
defeat in the field sustained by the Union army during that battle-week.

General McClellan then decided to change his base of operations; which,
rendered into plain English, meant that he had been flanked, and was
obliged to make the best move he could to save his army and material. The
troops fought all day, and ran all night, till they reached the James
River, where they were protected by the all-powerful gunboats. In the
battles of Savage's Station, Glendale and Malvern Hills, they were
victorious, and fought as no troops had ever fought before. As a retreat,
it was successful; but it was the sad and inglorious end of the
Peninsular campaign.

The whole brigade to which Lieutenant Somers belonged went on picket
every third day. While the tremendous operations to which we have briefly
alluded were taking place on the right, the soldiers on the left were
leading their ordinary military life. But they were thinking men, and,
while they were firm in their devotion to the good cause, they were
disturbed by doubts and fears. They knew not, as they listened to the
booming guns, whether they were in the midst of victory or defeat.
Occasionally, they were shelled behind their breastworks; apparently for
the purpose, on the part of the rebels, of keeping our forces from
interfering with the work on the right.

The brigade went on picket, and here the troops were face to face with
the enemy. Lieutenant Somers, by the illness of the captain and the
absence of the first lieutenant, was in command of his company. But there
was no chance to do anything to distinguish himself, except that steady
and patient attention to duty which is the constant opportunity of every
good officer.

"Well, captain, was there anything like this at Magenta?" asked Somers,
as he met De Banyan.

"This is tame, Somers. Magenta was a lively scene."

"I fancy it will not remain tame much longer. We shall either be in
Richmond as victors or prisoners within a few days."

"Don't croak, Somers. It will all come out right in the end."

"I have no doubt of that; but I feel just as though some big thing was
going to happen."

"So do I; and I felt so just before the battle of Solferino. By the way,
on the night before that battle, I captured a whole brigade with my
single company, while I was out on picket-duty."

"Indeed!" laughed Somers.

"I'll tell you how it was."

"Don't take that trouble, captain; for I shall not believe you if you
do."

"Do you mean to doubt my word, even before I utter it?" demanded the
captain, apparently much hurt by the insinuation.

"Captain de Banyan, I wish I could persuade you to speak the truth at all
times."

"Come, Somers, that's rather a grave charge; and, if it came from any
other man than yourself, I should challenge him on the spot," added the
captain, throwing back his head, and looking dignified enough to be the
commander-in-chief.

"You may challenge me if you please; but let us be serious for a moment."

"I am serious, and have been all the time."

"You are a first-rate fellow, captain; I like you almost as well as I do
my own brother."

"You are a sensible young man, Somers," replied De Banyan, slightly
relaxing the rigid muscles of his face.

"You are a brave man, and as brilliant as you are brave. I have only one
fault to find with you."

"What's that?"

"You will draw the long-bow."

"In other words, I will lie. Somers, you hurt my feelings. I took a fancy
to you the first time I ever saw you, and it pains me to hear you talk in
that manner. Do you think that I, an officer and a gentleman, would stoop
to the vice of lying?"

"You certainly do not expect any one to believe those wretched big
stories you tell?"

"Certainly I do," replied the captain with dignity.

"But they contradict themselves."

"Perhaps you don't believe there ever was such an event as the battle of
Magenta."

"Come, come, my friend; just slide off that high horse."

"Lieutenant Somers, my word has been doubted; my good faith maligned; my
character for truth and veracity questioned."

"Yes, I know all that very well; but answer me one question, captain.
Seriously and solemnly, were you at the battle of Magenta?"

"I decline to answer one who doubts my veracity. If I answered you in the
affirmative, you would not believe me."

"I don't think I should; but, if you should answer me in the negative, I
should have full faith in your reply."

"I cannot answer on those terms. Somers, I am offended. I don't know but
that I am in duty bound to challenge you. Just after the battle of
Magenta, I felt compelled to challenge a young officer who cast an
imputation upon my word. We fought, and he fell. His brother challenged
me then, and I had to put a bullet through his head. The family were
Corsicans, I believe; and one after another challenged me, till they got
down to fifth cousins; and I laid out fifteen of them--I think it was
fifteen; I don't remember the exact number, but I could tell by referring
to my diary. You are so precise and particular, that I want to give you
the facts just as they are."

"You haven't the diary with you, I suppose?"

"Of course not; I couldn't carry a volume like that around with me. I
only mention this circumstance to show you the sad results which
sometimes follow in the wake of a duel."

"But I'm not a Corsican; and I don't think you need fear any such results
in my case, if you should conclude to challenge me," answered Somers with
abundant good nature.

"Now, seriously and solemnly, Somers, this doubting a comrade's word is a
vicious habit. It shows that you have no confidence in what I say."

"That is precisely the truth; but I think you are responsible for the
fact, not I. If you would only tell the truth----"

"Tell the truth! My dear fellow, you keep making the matter worse,
instead of better."

"So do you; for, instead of abandoning your bad habit, you tell me an
absurd story about killing fifteen men in a series of duels!"

"I told you I couldn't fix the exact number. You are too critical by
half."

"I am not particular about the number; for I don't believe you killed
even a single person in a duel. You are too good a fellow to do anything
of the sort."

"Somers, I have been laboring to keep my temper; but I am afraid you will
make me mad, if you keep on. I think we had better suspend this
conversation before it leads to any unhappy results;" and the captain
rose from the ground, and glanced in the direction of the enemy's
pickets.

"The most unhappy result I could conceive of would be your continuing
this bad practice of telling big stories," replied Somers, standing up by
the side of his companion.

"No more; you add insult to injury, Somers."

"Really, captain, you injure yourself by this habit, and----"

Captain de Banyan, at this point of the conversation, suddenly turned
round, and sprang upon the lieutenant, bearing him to the ground before
the latter could even make a movement in self-defense. Together they
rolled upon the earth, at the foot of the tree whose sheltering branches
had protected them from the intense heat of the sun. Somers, as the
reader already knows, was bold and belligerent before an attack; and, on
the impulse of the moment, he proceeded to repel the sharp assault of his
companion.

"If you fight a duel in that way, I am ready to take part in it," said
he, his face red with anger. "Let go of me!"

"With pleasure, my dear boy," replied De Banyan, edging away from him.

"What do you mean by pitching into me in that way?" demanded Somers
angrily.

"I have been trying this half hour to teach you a useful lesson; but you
don't know who your best friends are."

"I think I do. Some of them tell the truth sometimes."

"Somers!" said the captain sternly.

"Captain de Banyan!" replied the lieutenant firmly.

"Do you see that hole in the tree?" continued Captain de Banyan, pointing
to a fresh bullet-mark.

"I do."

"I only pulled you down to keep that rifle-ball from going through your
head. I saw a rebel picket through the trees, ready to fire at us. The
ball struck the tree before we struck the ground."

"Forgive me, captain. I did not understand the movement," replied Somers,
extending his hand.

"With all my heart," replied the captain, taking the proffered hand. "We
don't always know who our best friends are."

"Perhaps not; but I know that you are one of my best friends. You have
just given me another reason for wishing you did not----" Somers
hesitated, not thinking it exactly fair to reproach his companion for his
vile habit, after he had rendered him such a signal service.

"Lie," added De Banyan, finishing the sentence.

"Perhaps it isn't exactly lying; you don't mean to deceive any one. At
the worst, they are only white lies. Now, captain, don't you think you
exaggerate sometimes?"

"Well, perhaps I do; my memory is rather poor. I don't carry my diary
with me."

"Don't you think it would be better if you could confine yourself to the
exact truth?" added Somers, who really felt a deep interest in his
associate.

"I think it very likely it would; but things get a little mixed up in my
mind. My memory is poor on details. Just after the battle of Magenta,
while I was lying wounded on the ground, one of the emperor's staff rode
up to me, and asked how many cannon my regiment had captured. To save my
life, I couldn't tell whether it was two hundred or three hundred. My
memory is very treacherous on details."

"I believe you are hopeless, captain," laughed Somers.

"Hopeless?"

"Why, you have told the biggest story that has passed your lips to-day."

"What, about the cannon?"

"Two hundred or three hundred! Why, your regiment captured all the guns
the Austrians had!"

"Didn't I tell you I couldn't remember whether it was two hundred or
three hundred? You are the most critical young man I ever met in the
whole course of my life!"

"But two hundred would be an abominable exaggeration. Perhaps you meant
muskets?"

"No; cannon."

"But, my dear captain, just consider for one moment. Of course the
batteries were supported?"

"To be sure they were."

"Six guns to a battery would have made fifty batteries; and----"

"Oh, confound your statistics!" exclaimed the captain impatiently.

"But statistics enable us to see the truth. Now, captain, at the battle
of Bunker Hill, I saw a man----"

"You?" demanded Captain de Banyan.

"I said so."

"Were you at the battle of Bunker Hill?"

"Didn't you see me there?"

"Come, come, Somers; you shouldn't trifle with the truth. I was not at
the battle you speak of."

"But I was----"

"You! You were not born till sixty years after the battle of Bunker
Hill."

"But I was--only illustrating your case."

"Here comes an orderly with something from headquarters," said Captain de
Banyan, apparently as much rejoiced to change the conversation as the
reader will be to have it changed.

The orderly proceeded to the position occupied by the field and staff
officers of the regiment; and, a few moments later, came an order for
Lieutenant Somers, with twenty of his men, selected for special duty, to
report at the division headquarters.

"You are in luck, Somers; you will have a glorious opportunity to
distinguish yourself," said Captain de Banyan, whose second lieutenant
was ordered to the command of Somers's company.

"I don't know what it means," replied our lieutenant.

"Don't you, indeed?" added the captain with a smile. "Don't you know what
special duty means? On the night before the battle of Solferino----"

"Excuse me, Captain de Banyan; but I am ordered to report forthwith,"
interrupted Somers, who had no desire to hear another "whopper."

The young lieutenant marched off, with his little force, to report as he
had been directed. He knew his men well enough to enable him to make a
good selection; and he was confident that they would stand by him to the
last.

"Do you know Senator Guilford?" demanded the general, after Somers had
passed through all the forms of reporting.

"I do, general," replied the lieutenant, with a fearful blush, and with a
wish in his heart that the distinguished Senator had minded his own
business.

"He speaks well of you, Lieutenant Somers," added the general.

"I am very much obliged to him for his kindness; but I never saw him but
once in my life."

"He asks a favor for you."

"I am very much obliged to him; but I don't ask any for myself, and I
hope you will not grant it. If any favors are bestowed upon me, I prefer
to earn them myself."

"Good!" exclaimed the general. "But I assure you and Senator Guilford
that no man in this division of the army will get a position he does not
deserve. I assure you, Lieutenant Somers, I should have thrown the
Senator's letter among the waste paper, if I had not known you before. I
remember you at Williamsburg; and you did a pretty thing in the
wheat-field yesterday. You are just the man I want."

"Thank you, sir; I should be very glad to prove that your good opinion is
well founded."

Apart from others, and in a low tone, the general gave his orders to
Lieutenant Somers to undertake a very difficult and dangerous scouting
expedition.

"Before sundown you will be a prisoner in Richmond, or a first
lieutenant," added the general as Somers withdrew.


CHAPTER IX

LIEUTENANT SOMERS CHANGES HIS NAME AND CHARACTER


Like the major-generals in the army, Lieutenant Somers had strong
aspirations in the direction of an independent command. Like those
distinguished worthies, no doubt, he felt competent to perform bigger
things than he had yet been called to achieve in the ordinary routine of
duty. He had the blood of heroes in his veins; and, in spite of all he
could do to keep his thoughts within the limits of modesty, he found them
soaring to the regions of the improbable and fanciful. His imagination
led him a wild race, and pictured him in the act of performing marvelous
deeds of valor and skill.

Fancy is a blind and reckless leader; and it gave our hero oftentimes a
command which his reason would not have permitted him to accept. What
boys, and even what men, think, when stimulated by ambition, would be too
ridiculous to put upon paper. If their thoughts could be disclosed to the
impertinent eye of the world, the proprietors would blushingly disown and
disclaim them.

Still, almost every live man and boy gives the reins to his fancy; and in
the Army of the Potomac, we will venture to say, there were a hundred
thousand privates and officers who permitted themselves to dream that
they were brigadiers and major-generals; that they did big things, and
received the grateful homage of the world. At any rate, Lieutenant Somers
did, modest as he was, even while he felt that he was utterly incompetent
to perform the duties incumbent on the two stars or the one star.

Experience had given him some confidence in his own powers; and there was
something delightful in the idea of having an independent command. It was
a partial, a very partial, realization of the wanderings of his vivid
fancy. He felt able to do something which Lilian Ashford would take
pleasure in reading in the newspapers; perhaps something which would
prove his fitness for a brigadier's star at some remote period. Now, we
have made all this explanation to show how Somers had prepared himself to
accomplish some great thing. The mission with which he had been intrusted
was an important one; and the safety of the whole left wing of the army
might depend upon its faithful performance.

He was wrought up to the highest pitch of patriotic inspiration by the
charge which had been laid upon him; and he was determined to bring back
the information required of him, even if he had to fly through the air to
obtain it. It was of no use to suggest impossibilities to a young man in
such a frame of mind; he did not know the meaning of the word. To impress
him with the importance of the duty intrusted to him, the general of
division had given him a faint outline of the intended movements of the
army. If the enemy massed his forces in this direction, it was of vital
necessity that the general should know it.

Thus prepared and thus inspired, Lieutenant Somers marched his little
force to the point from which he proposed to operate. On his right hand
there was a dense wood, on the border of which extended one of the
numerous cross-roads that checker the country. On his left was another
piece of woods, terminating in a point about a quarter of a mile from the
road and in the center of a valley.

On the hill beyond was the intrenched line of the rebels. In front of it,
at the foot of the slope, was a line of rifle-pits, which were occupied
by the rebel pickets. The hill and the woods concealed the operations of
the enemy; and no signal station was high enough to obtain the necessary
information. The woods on both sides of the open space were picketed by
the rebels; and the rifle-pits in front were an effectual check to the
advance of a small force, while a large one could not be sent up without
bringing on a general engagement, which had been prohibited by the
commanding general.

Lieutenant Somers surveyed the ground, and came to the conclusion that
his chance of spending the night in Libby Prison was better than his
chance of being made a first lieutenant. The rifle-pits had a chilling
effect upon the fine dreams in which his fancy had indulged. He was not a
grub, and could not burrow through the earth to the rebel lines; he had
no wings, and could not fly over them. The obstacles which are so easily
overcome in one's dreams appear mountain-high in real life. He looked
troubled and anxious; but, having put his hand to the plow, he was
determined not to turn back.

The best way to conquer a difficulty is to charge upon it; and this
Somers decided to do, even though he had no well-defined plan for the
accomplishment of his purpose. Avoiding the observation of the rebels in
the rifle-pits, he moved round, and reached the point of woods on the
left of the road.

"Excuse me, Lieutenant Somers," said Sergeant Hapgood with a military
salute: "'tain't none o' my business, but I'd like to know where you are
goin' to."

"Through this woods," replied Somers doggedly.

"You used to be a good boy, when you was a boy; and I hope you've said
your prayers," replied old Hapgood, appalled at the prospect before his
young friend.

"Don't you croak, uncle," added Somers.

"The rebels' pickets are up here, not twenty rods distant. Do you
calculate to go through them, or over them?"

"Either--just as I can; but I am going through, somehow or other."

"It can't be done! Thunderation! you'll bring down the whole rebel army
upon us! You don't think of going over there with only twenty men!"

"I do, uncle. I'm going over on that hill yonder, and I'm coming back
again before night."

Hapgood tapped his forehead significantly with his finger to indicate
that the young lieutenant had lost his senses.

"I was ordered to do it, and I am going to do it, uncle. You can set your
mind at rest on that point."

"It can't be did!" said the old man positively. "I don't keer who told
you to do it; it can't be did with less'n twenty thousand men. You will
sacrifice yourself and all the rest of us."

"You may return to the camp, if you wish."

"Tom Somers--Lieutenant Somers," said the old man, much hurt by the words
of the young officer, "you know I'm not afraid of anything; and I didn't
expect you'd say that to me."

"Excuse me, uncle; I didn't mean it. Now, hear me a moment."

In a low tone, Lieutenant Somers told the sergeant the nature of his
mission, and what depended upon its prompt and successful execution.

"He ought to have sent a division to do such a job," muttered the old
man, taking off his cap, and scratching his bald head. "Howsomever, I'm
ready to follow you wherever you choose to go."

"Forward, then," replied Somers; and they advanced cautiously through the
woods till they came to a kind of bog-hole, beyond which they discovered
the rebel pickets.

The party lay down on the ground, and crawled on the edge of the bog,
till they obtained a fair view of the rebels.

"Now, uncle, the time has come, and my plan is formed," said Somers in a
whisper. "When they discover you, retreat with the men as fast as you
can. Fire on the rebels; but don't pay any attention to me."

"Where are you going?" demanded the old man.

"When you retire, I am going to roll into that grass. They will follow
you; and, as soon as they have passed me, I shall move forward."

"I won't do anything of the sort. Thunderation! you are goin' to run
right into the arms of the rebels."

"Obey my orders! That's all you have to do. I can take care of myself."

"Excuse me, Tom--Lieutenant Somers."

"I know all about it, uncle. You do what I tell you, and you shall have
all the particulars to-night, when I return."

"Return! You will be in Libby, if you are not shot, by dark."

"If I am, leave that to me," replied Somers, as he rolled over into the
long grass of the bog, and entirely concealed himself from the view of
his own men. "Now fire one or two shots into the rebel picket and then
retire."

Hapgood reluctantly obeyed the order; though he felt as though he was
signing the death-warrant of his young friend by doing so. The bullets
began to fly; but the sergeant took care to keep his men out of sight as
they retreated. The enemy followed; for they always chase a retiring foe,
and run from an advancing one. They reached the bog in which Somers was
concealed, where one of the three fell before a ball which the lieutenant
was sure had been directed by the practiced eye of the veteran sergeant.
The other two swore at the calamity, and vowed vengeance on the Yankee
who had done the deed.

Hapgood continued to retire, and led his foe to the very verge of the
woods. In the meantime, the lieutenant emerged from his hiding-place. The
first object that attracted his attention was the ghastly face of the
dead rebel. The sight of him was not pleasant, but it was suggestive;
and, without the loss of a moment, he dragged the body into the grass,
and hastily removed the uniform from it. It was a loathsome task; but the
necessity of the moment seemed to justify the act. Taking off his own
uniform, he put on that of the dead rebel, who was fortunately about his
own size. Rolling up his own clothing in as small a bundle as possible,
he concealed it in the bog, at some distance from the place where the
picket had fallen. Dragging the corpse to a quagmire, he sunk it beneath
the muddy waters, and it passed from his view. After taking the
precaution to straighten up the long grass, which might have betrayed his
movements, he advanced towards the rebel lines.

Lieutenant Somers felt that he was now actually embarked in his perilous
venture. He was within the enemy's line, and in disguise. If discovered,
he would be liable to the penalty of being a spy. But inasmuch as he did
not intend to be discovered, he did not think it necessary to expend his
nervous energy in a discussion of this question. Success was a duty to
him; and he spent no time in considering the dark side of the picture.

He was excited, and he knew that he was excited. He knew that coolness
and impudence were the essential elements of success in such an
adventure; and when he had followed the woods nearly to the top of the
hill, he sat down to recover his self-possession, and compose his nerves
to their natural quietude. It was not a very easy matter. He had already
arranged his plan of future operations, and he diligently set about the
business of making his appearance correspond with his circumstances.

He felt that he was hardly dirty enough to be a rebel; so he rubbed his
face, neck and hands with some dark-colored earth, ripped his pants and
coat in sundry places, and otherwise disfigured his comely person, till
Miss Lilian Ashford would not have known him, or if she had known him,
would have been ashamed to acknowledge his acquaintance. Having completed
this work to his entire satisfaction, he rose, and resumed his march
towards the rebel line. He had advanced but a few paces before he felt
something in the breast-pocket of his coat, which excited his curiosity.
It was a diary which the dead soldier had kept from the time he entered
the army.

Such a work would have been deeply interesting to the lieutenant at any
time, but especially at the present, when he was sadly in want of the
information which would enable him to personate the difficult part he had
chosen to perform. Seating himself on the ground again, he was soon
absorbed in the contents of the note-book. The owner's name was Owen
Raynes; and from the diary Somers learned that he had been a clerk in
Richmond when the war broke out; and that his father resided on the
Williamsburg road, near Seven Pines, where the battle had been fought.
Somers was alarmed at this information; for the young man must be well
known in the neighborhood. Of course he could not assume the name and
character of Owen Raynes.

Though the time was precious, he continued to read the diary till he came
to an entry which excited his deep interest: "Poor Allan Garland was
captured to-day by the Yankees; and I suppose they will torture and
starve the poor fellow, as they have the rest of our boys who have fallen
into their hands. We shall never meet again. He was a good fellow. He was
on a scout."

Somers was deeply concerned about poor Allan Garland, who had fallen into
the hands of the terrible Yankees, to be tortured and starved; and he
turned back to the beginning of the diary to obtain further particulars
in regard to this interesting person. Fortunately for history, and
particularly for Lieutenant Somers, Owen Raynes had given a tolerably
full account of his friend. They had been to school together in Union,
Alabama, where Owen had an uncle, and where Allan resided. They were fast
friends; and both agreed to enlist as volunteers in the Fourth Alabama,
Colonel Bush Jones; for their schoolmates were mostly in this regiment.

When the regiment arrived at Richmond, Owen had not time to visit his
father; for the troops were instantly ordered to Manassas, and he
enrolled himself without discovering that his friend was not in the
ranks. He was too sick to come with his comrades; "wrote letter to Allan"
was a frequent entry in the diary, until June 18, 1862, when this record
appears: "Allan joined the regiment to-day; has been sick about a year;
is very well now; he is a handsome fellow. Sue shall be his wife, if I
can bring it about; they have kept up a correspondence for three years;
she never saw him, but she will like him."

"All right!" exclaimed Somers, as he closed the book, and put it in his
pocket. "I am Allan Garland. Don't think I shall marry Sue, though,
whoever she may be. I wonder if Lilian Ashford would object. I don't know
as she would. Never mind; I am a soldier of the Fourth Alabama, Colonel
Jones, just now. How are you, Allan Garland?"

He walked along towards the rebel lines, feeling in his pockets for
further revelations. An old letter from Allan Garland rewarded his
search. He spoke tenderly of Sue, who was Owen's sister.

"Sue wouldn't think I'm very handsome just now," said Somers, glancing at
his dirty hands, and imagining his dirty face, as he continued to
advance.


CHAPTER X

ALLAN GARLAND AND FRIENDS


Allan Garland, _née_ Somers, advanced confidently towards the rebel
line. As he was to perform the leading part in the exciting drama about
to be acted, he conducted himself with the utmost caution. Everything
depended upon the amount of impudence he could bring to bear upon the
case before him, and the skill with which he personated the part he had
chosen. He knew of nothing, short of falling on the Fourth Alabama, which
could disconcert him. Even if he did, there were only a few who knew the
captured scout; and his chances were fair, even if the worst should
befall him.

"Stand!" said a rebel sentinel on the breastwork of the line. "Who goes
there?"

"Friend," replied Somers confidently.

"What's your name?"

"Allan Garland. Can you tell me where the Fourth Alabama is?"

"About four miles from here. Do you belong to the Fourth Alabama?"

"Well, I did before I was captured; I don't know where I belong now."

"Where d'ye come from?"

"Just got away from the Yankees. They gobbled me up about three weeks
ago."

"Bully for you! Come in; you can report to the officer of the day."

Somers was entirely willing, and hastened in the direction indicated by
the sentinel; and was soon ushered into the presence of Major Platner,
brigade-officer of the day. He was a very pompous little man, and Somers
saw his weakness as soon as he spoke. With a most profound bow, he
answered the questions of the major, using the utmost deference in his
tone and manner.

"How dare you present yourself before an officer of the day with such a
dirty face?" demanded Major Platner.

"I hope your honor will pardon me; but I have just escaped from the
Yankees, and have not had time to wash my face. If you please, sir, I
will go and do it now. I thought I ought to come to you without any
delay."

"You did right, young man," replied the major with a consequential
flourish of the hand. "You were out scouting when you were taken?"

"Yes, sir."

Major Platner then proceeded to ask a great many questions in regard to
the force and position of the Yankees; all of which Somers answered
entirely in the interest of the Union party. He was very careful not to
give a particle of information that could be useful to the rebels; at the
same time avoiding any gross exaggerations which would throw discredit on
his story.

"You seem to be a very intelligent and patriotic young man," added the
officer. "I have heard some inquiries for a person of your description
to-day."

"I have always endeavored to do my duty to my country," answered Somers,
trying to blush under the compliment of the patronizing little major;
"and I kept my eyes wide open while I was in the Yankee camps."

"I see you did. Your information is very definite, and, I doubt not, very
reliable."

"My only desire has been to serve my country, sir," added Somers very
modestly.

"Well, go and wash your face, so that we can see what color you are, and
I will report your name to the general, who was inquiring for a useful
person like yourself. I trust that you will have discretion enough not to
mention anything that has passed between us."

"Certainly not, sir. I judge, from what you have said, that my poor
services may be required for some special service."

"That is the idea which I intended to convey. In a word, the commander of
this division wants information. You have just come from the Yankee
lines, and you know where to look for the intelligence that will be of
the most value to us."

"I think I do, sir."

"The fact that you have just made your way through the Yankee lines shows
that you possess the necessary address."

"I thank you for your good opinion; and I assure you, sir, that I should
be very glad to serve my country in any capacity in which she may require
my humble labors."

"Very well, young man."

"A plan occurs to me now, by which I could easily enter the Yankee
lines."

"Indeed! What is that?"

"When I ran through the enemy's pickets, they fired upon me, and one of
them chased me. I brought him down with my pistol," replied Somers,
producing the weapon, which he had taken the precaution to bring with
him. "I know just where that Yankee lies now; I could borrow his uniform,
and go in among the enemy without suspicion."

"Very well arranged, young man."

The major then directed an orderly to attend to the wants of the
fugitive, and gave the latter orders to report to him within two hours.
Somers washed his face, and partook of some cold bacon and corn bread,
which constituted the staple of the rebel rations. He then told the
orderly that he wanted to look round a little, and find his regiment, if
he could; but was informed that the camp regulations did not permit any
strolling about the camps. He suggested that the officer of the day would
give him a pass, and he returned to the major to beg this favor. It was
readily granted; and the time for him to report was extended to four
hours, as his regiment was situated at some distance from the brigade
camp, though it belonged to the same division.

Thus provided, Somers commenced his tour of observation. Of course, he
had no intention of visiting the Fourth Alabama; for that would have been
putting his head into the lion's mouth. We need only say, that he used
his time to the best advantage for the country in whose service he had
enlisted. He noted the brigades, regiments, and batteries of artillery,
which he saw in his walk; and arranged a little scheme in his mind, by
which he could remember the number of each.

In the course of his perambulations, he reached the Williamsburg road,
and was on the point of extending his observations in the direction of
the railroad, when he was stopped by a sentinel. He produced his pass,
which the rebel soldier could not read; and he was conducted to the
sergeant of the guard, who was listening to a conversation between a
captain and an old man who appeared to be a farmer. They were bargaining
about some forage which the captain wanted, and which the farmer was not
disposed to sell.

"What have you there?" demanded the officer, as the sentinel brought in
the doubtful case.

"Man with a pass."

"Your pass is good up to the Williamsburg road, and no farther," said the
sergeant when he had read the document.

"I didn't know where the lines were," replied Somers, returning the pass
to his pocket.

"Where are you going?" asked the officer, apparently not satisfied with
the appearance of the "man with a pass."

"Looking for my regiment, sir," replied Somers, giving the military
salute; which excess of politeness, however, was lost on the
matter-of-fact captain.

"What regiment?"

"The Fourth Alabama."

"The Fourth Alabama! What are you doing over here, then?"

"I am a stranger in these parts; and I don't know where to look. I have
just escaped from the Yankees, and don't know much about this part of the
country."

"What is your name?"

"Allan Garland, sir."

"What!" exclaimed the old farmer, suddenly becoming interested in the
conversation.

"In my opinion, you are a deserter," added the officer in a crabbed tone.
"I advise you to arrest him, sergeant. That pass is good for nothing on
this road."

"No, captain, he is not a deserter," interposed the farmer with energy.
"I know him well; and he is as true and patriotic a young man as there is
in the Southern Confederacy."

Somers looked at the farmer with astonishment. He did not remember to
have seen him before; and he could not account for the interest he
manifested in his case.

"What do you know of him, Mr. Raynes?"

Mr. Raynes! That explained the matter; and Somers could not help
shuddering in the presence of the man whose son he had buried in the soft
mud of the bog.

"He is my son's friend," replied the farmer. "Both of them belong to the
Fourth Alabama."

"That may be, Mr. Raynes; but do you suppose a man looking for the Fourth
Alabama would be wandering about here?"

"He is a stranger in Virginia. He came on from Alabama only a few weeks
since, and was captured while out on a scouting expedition. I assure you,
captain, it is all right; I will vouch for him."

"Very well, Mr. Raynes! If the sergeant is willing to take your word for
it, I have nothing further to say. Indeed, it is no business of mine; but
our soldiers are allowed to walk over to the enemy, or back into the
woods, without let or hindrance. It's a disgrace to the service. Major
Platner gives this man a pass to go all over the country. Do as you
please, sergeant."

"I mean to," replied the sergeant in an undertone; for he was not pleased
at this interference on the part of a commissary of subsistence, who had
nothing whatever to do with the affair. "I am satisfied," he added aloud.

"Allan, I am very glad to see you; and I thank God that you have been
enabled to escape from the Yankees. Have you seen Owen since you got
back?"

Somers trembled at the question; and, while he did not dare to tell the
old man the truth, the thought of telling him a falsehood was utterly
repulsive to his nature. It was easy enough to deceive the enemy in
war--his duty called upon him to do this; but to deceive an old, fond
father, in regard to a true and devoted son, seemed terrible to him.

"He was out on picket when I came through," he replied after some
hesitation.

"Then you did not meet him. He will be delighted to see you again; for
really the boy is as fond of you as he is of his sister."

Somers found himself unable to answer to the warm congratulations of the
old man, or to enter into the spirit of the conversation. The staring,
death-sealed eyes of Owen Raynes haunted him; and, when he attempted to
reciprocate the friendly sentiments of the doting father, his heart
seemed to rise up in his throat, and choke his utterance. The only
consolation he could derive from the remembrance of the scene in the
woods was in the fact that he had not taken the life of Owen Raynes
himself. He wore his clothes, and had his diary and letters in his
pocket.

"You are very sad, Allan! I should think you would be happy to escape
from the Yankees. They would have starved you to death in time."

"I think not, sir! They are not so cruel as that," added Somers, who
desired to remove such a reproach from the mind of the old man.

"Perhaps they would not willingly starve their prisoners; but I don't see
how they could avoid it. They say that the people of the North are
suffering terribly for the want of food. In New York, the laboring
classes have attacked the banks and the flour-stores, urged on by hunger.
There will be terrible times in the North before many months have gone
by. I pity the people there, though it is their own fault. I hope God
will be merciful to them, and spare them from some of the consequences of
their own folly. I am thankful that you have escaped from them."

"I don't think they are quite so badly off as you say," answered Somers,
provoked by this view of the condition and resources of the North. "I
have talked with a great many Yankee soldiers, and they say that plenty
abounds in all the Northern States."

"They would tell you so. They are deceived by their officers."

"That's the way it is done," added the rebel sergeant, who had been
listening to the conversation.

"But I saw what rations these soldiers have. They live like lords."

"That's the very thing which will starve all the people in the North.
Their big armies will eat them out of house and home in a few months,
Allan."

"I think not, Mr. Raynes."

"A gentleman from New York, who got through the lines last week, says the
grass is a foot high in some of the streets of New York. The people can't
find anything to do, and are cursing their rulers for plunging them into
this horrid war."

"I think the gentleman from New York lied," replied Somers with a smile.
"I saw the New York papers every day while I was in the Yankee lines; and
they are full of advertisements, which look like business. Why, in one
paper I saw four columns of 'Wants,' in which people advertised for
farm-laborers, house-servants, clerks and sailors."

"Ah! Allan, those papers are printed to sell in the Yankee army. I'm sure
I hope they are not so badly off as has been represented. I should not
want my worst enemy to suffer what they are called upon to endure. It is
all their own fault; but I hope God will be merciful to them."

"I think you needn't feel bad about them," added Somers, amused, but
indignant at the pitiful stories which were circulated in the South to
keep up the courage of the people.

"Let that pass, then. Really, Allan, I am very glad to see you. You must
go to the house with me. Sue will be delighted to meet you. She talks
about you a great deal; and I can insure you a warm welcome."

"I think I cannot stop to call now; but I will try to come over in a few
days," replied Somers, embarrassed beyond measure at the idea of facing
Sue and the rest of the family.

"Not stop!" exclaimed Mr. Raynes, holding up his hands with surprise.

"Not now, sir; I am in no condition to appear before ladies," he added,
extending his arms so as to display his tattered garments to the fullest
advantage. "You know a young man is rather particular about his
appearance when he is going into the company of ladies, and especially
into the presence of _some_ ladies. The fact is, I tore my uniform all to
pieces after I passed through the Yankee lines."

"Never mind your uniform, my boy. It looks as though it had seen service;
and that is the best recommendation a young man can have to the girls in
these times. You must go, Allan."

"Indeed, sir, I hope you will excuse me for a few days," pleaded Somers.

"Come, Allan! this is not kind of you. Sue has been dying to see you for
a year. She was terribly disappointed when you did not come up with your
regiment, and again when she heard you had joined without calling upon
us. If it had been Owen, she could not have felt worse when you were
captured. Now you want to disappoint her again."

"You need not mention that you have seen me, Mr. Raynes," suggested
Somers.

"Not tell her that you have escaped, when she is fretting about you every
day of her life! That would be too bad."

"You can tell her as much as you please without informing her that you
have seen me."

"I could not tell a lie, Allan. It would choke me," said the old man
solemnly. "You must go with me."

"Let me get another uniform, and it would surprise her when I come."

"No more words, young man. You must go. It is only a short distance,"
replied Mr. Raynes, passing his arm through that of Somers, and walking
towards his house. "It will be the happiest day for Sue which she has
seen for a year."

"Happier for her than it will be for me," thought Somers, who was
disposed to break away from the old man, and make his escape.

By this time, Sue had become an awful bugbear to the poor fellow. In
these days of photographs, it is more than probable that she had a
picture of the original Allan Garland, and the cheat would be discovered
the moment he showed his face. He was deliberating a plan for breaking
away from his persistent friend, when a young lady of eighteen stepped
out from the bushes by the roadside, and hailed the old man.


CHAPTER XI

THE VIRGINIA MAIDEN


"Where have you been, father?" said the young lady in a very sweet and
gentle tone, which, however, sounded like the knell of doom to poor
Somers. "I have been waiting for you half an hour."

But then, perceiving a stranger with her father, she drew back, abashed
at her own forwardness.

"Come here, Sue," said the old man. "Come here; I want to see you."

She advanced timidly from the bushes where she had been partially
concealed from the gaze of the passers-by. She was certainly a very
pleasant and comely-looking maiden; but, if she had been the "Witch of
Endor," she could not have been any more disagreeable to Somers. He was
as fond of adventure as any young man; and if he could have forgotten
that poor Owen Raynes, the son and the brother, was at that moment lying
in the mud of the swamp; his manly form no more to gladden the hearts of
those who stood before him; his voice hushed in death, no more to utter
the accents of affection to the devoted father and his loving sister--if
he could have forgotten his relations with the dead Owen, he might even
have enjoyed the exciting situation in which he was placed.

Sue, with a blushing face and half-averted gaze, stepped out into the
road, and stole a few timid glances at the young lieutenant. It was quite
evident that she did not have a suspicion of the identity of the young
soldier before her. Her father appeared to have a vein of romance in his
character, and was disposed to torture her for a time with the torments
of suspense, before he declared to her the astounding truth, that the
young soldier was her well-known but hitherto unseen friend from Alabama,
the bosom companion of her brother Owen, and, if everything worked as the
loving conspirators intended, the future husband of the affectionate
maiden.

She did not like to ask who the stranger was; and she thought it was very
provoking of her father not to tell her, when she was so fearfully
embarrassed by her position. She continued to blush; and Somers felt so
awkward, that he couldn't help joining her in this interesting display of
roses on the cheeks.

"Don't you know him, Sue?" demanded the farmer, when he had tantalized
her as long as the circumstances would warrant.

"Why, of course I don't, father!" stammered the Virginia maiden.

"Look in his face, and see if you can't tell," persisted Mr. Raynes.

"How absurd, father!"

"Absurd, child? Not at all absurd! Haven't you his picture in the house?
And, if I mistake not, you have looked at it as many as three times a day
for the last year."

"Now, father, you are too bad! I haven't done anything of the sort,"
protested Sue, pouting and twisting her shoulders as any country girl,
who had not been trained in a satinwood seminary, would have done under
such trying circumstances. "You don't mean to say that is Allan Garland?"
added she, her pretty face lighting up with an expression of intense
satisfaction.

"But I do, Sue," replied Mr. Raynes with emphasis.

"Why, Allan! I am so glad to see you! I was afraid I should never see
you!" exclaimed Sue, rushing up to the young man, and extending both her
hands, which he felt compelled to accept.

He was fearful that she would kiss him; and, though he would have been
under obligations to submit to the infliction, he was not sure that the
operation would not cause him to faint. Fortunately for him, Sue was
reasonable in her behavior; and he escaped cheaper than he expected, when
he beheld the impetuous charge which the maiden made upon him. If he had
really been Allan Garland, his reception would have been entirely proper,
and highly creditable to the affectionate nature of the Virginia damsel.
He was not the young gentleman from Alabama; and he felt as though he had
been flanked on both sides, with no chance to beat off the enemy in
front, or to run away in the rear. He was only a short distance from a
line of rebel sentinels, and he did not consider it prudent to escape by
taking to his legs. He did not wear his fighting socks at this time, and
felt that it would be no disgrace to run away from such an enemy as that
which confronted him.

"I am very glad to see you, Allan," repeated Sue, as the wretched young
man did not venture to use his tongue.

"Thank you, thank you, Miss Raynes!" said he at last, when silence seemed
even more dangerous than speech.

"Miss Raynes! Dear me, Allan, how very formal and precise you are! You
called me Sue in your letters."

"Did I? Well, I didn't know it," replied Somers with a stroke of candor
not to be expected under the circumstances.

"Certainly you did. I don't think you ever mentioned such a person as
Miss Raynes."

"I am confident I didn't," added he with another touch of candor. "But I
will always call you Sue hereafter, when I have occasion to speak to
you."

"Thank you, Allan! You begin to sound a little like yourself."

Somers was very glad to hear it, but wished he had been five miles off,
even if it had been in the very jaws of the Fourth Alabama.

"You don't look a bit like your photograph," continued Sue, gazing with
admiration at the face of the young man; for which those who ever saw
Lieutenant Somers will cheerfully pardon her.

"Do you think so?"

"I'm sure you don't."

"That's very strange. Everybody who has seen my photograph says it looks
exactly like me."

"I don't think so."

"I gave one to a young lady of my acquaintance, who said it was perfect."

"Indeed! Who was she?"

"She is a young lady whom I have met only two or three times."

"What is her name?"

"Lilian Ashford."

"What a pretty name!" said Sue, endeavoring to be magnanimous; though it
was evident that she was troubled by the honest avowal of the young
soldier.

"Where does she live?"

"She is at the North, now," answered Somers, who could not bear to tell a
lie when there was no need of such a sacrifice.

He was becoming very uneasy under this rigid catechizing, and hoped she
would not ask any more questions about Lilian Ashford. He had mentioned
her name with the hope that it might produce a coldness on her part which
would afford him some advantage. She did not, however, seem to be
annihilated by the prospect of a rival, and was proceeding to interrogate
him still further in regard to the lady, with whom he was apparently
intimate enough to present her his photograph, when Mr. Raynes reminded
her that they were standing in the road, and had better go into the
house.

"Now, Mr. Raynes, as I have seen Sue, and Sue has seen me, I think I had
better hasten to my regiment," suggested Somers.

"Not yet, Allan," replied the old man.

"Do you wish to run away, and leave me so soon, you monster?" added Sue.
"I tell you, sir, I shall not let you go yet."

"But, Sue! you forget that I have just returned from the Yankees. I was
furnished with a pass, to enable me to find my regiment."

"You shall find it in good time."

"Come to the house, Allan: we will not detain you long," added Mr.
Raynes.

"You must and shall come!" protested Sue, taking him by the arm, and
absolutely compelling him to go, or be guilty of the most unpardonable
rudeness to the fair Virginia damsel.

"I should be very glad to go with you, Sue, if my duty did not call me
elsewhere. I am to be sent off on very important service."

"Again?--so soon?"

"This very day. I may never see you again."

"And you would coolly run away and leave me without even going into the
house!"

"But my duty, Sue!"

"You will be in time for your duty."

"I may be arrested as a deserter."

"Nonsense! You have a pass in your pocket."

"In spite of the pass, if your father had not happened to see me, I
should have been arrested, and might have spent a day or two in the
guardhouse before the case could have been explained."

"No more argument, Allan," said the persevering girl. "Here is the house;
you shall go in and look at mother, if you don't stop but a minute.
Besides, I want to see your photograph while you are present; for I am
sure you don't look any more like the picture than the picture does like
you."

"Probably not," replied Somers, as the resolute maiden dragged him into
the house; where, without stopping to breathe, she presented him to her
mother, with the astounding declaration, that he was Allan Garland.

Mrs. Raynes gave him a cordial Virginia welcome; and, while he was
endeavoring to make himself as agreeable as possible to the old lady, Sue
rushed up-stairs to procure the faithless photograph. She returned in a
moment with the picture in her hand, and proceeded at once to institute a
comparison between the shadow and the substance.

"Now, stand up here, sir, and let me see," said she, as she playfully
whisked him round and scrutinized his features. "I told you it did not
look like you; and I am very sure now that it does not."

"Let me see," added Somers, extending his hand for the picture.

"Will you promise to give it back to me?"

"Certainly I will! You don't imagine I would be so mean as to confiscate
it?"

"I should not care much if you did, now that I have found out it does not
look any more like you than it does like me," she answered, handing him
the photograph.

"Where did you get this picture, Sue?"

"Where did I get it? Well, that is cool! Didn't you send it to me
yourself?" And Sue began to exhibit some symptoms of amazement.

"I am very sure I never sent you this picture," added Somers gravely.

"You did not?"

"Never."

"Why, Allan Garland!"

"This is not my picture."

"I shouldn't think it was."

Thereupon Mr. Raynes began to laugh in the most immoderate manner;
opening his mouth wide enough to take in a very small load of hay, and
shaking his sides in the most extraordinary style.

"What are you laughing at, pa?" demanded Sue, blushing up to the eyes, as
though she already felt the force of some keenly satirical remark which
was struggling for expression in the mouth of the farmer.

"To think you have been looking at that picture three times a day for a
year, studying, gazing at it; kissing it, for aught I know; and then to
find out that it is not Allan after all!" roared the Virginia farmer
between the outbreaks of his mirth. "I haven't done anything but groan
since the war began, and it does me good to laugh. I haven't had a jolly
time before since the battle of Bull Run, as the Yankees call it."

"You are the most absurd pa in Virginia. I didn't look at it three times
a day, I never studied it, and I'm sure I never kissed it. No wonder
Allan wants to get away, when he finds what an absurd girl you make me
out to be. You think I'm a fool, don't you, Allan?"

"I do not, by any means. I'm sure, if I had your picture, I shouldn't
have been ashamed to look at it three times a day," replied Somers,
gallantly coming to the rescue of the maiden. "But, really, my Virginia
patriarch," he added, using an expression which he had found in the
correspondence in his pocket, "I must tear myself away."

"You seem to be glad enough to go," pouted Sue.

"Sorry to go, but compelled by the duty I owe my country to leave you."

"When will you come again?"

"Of course, that question I cannot answer. I may never see you again.
This is a terrible war, and we cannot tell what a day may bring forth,"
replied Somers solemnly; and the thought was all the more solemn when he
thought of the cold corpse of the son and brother concealed in the mire
of the swamp.

He had seen the old man laugh as none but a happy man can; and he could
not help feeling what a terrible revulsion a few words from him might
cause. He had watched the playful manner of Sue, and had joined in the
gay raillery of the moment. A word from him would crush her spirit, and
bow that loving mother to the ground. The scene had not been one of his
own choosing; and he would gladly escape the necessity of dissembling
before those affectionate hearts.

"We are on the eve of a terrible battle," added the old man very gravely.
"Hundreds of our poor boys went down yesterday, never to rise again. We
tremble when we think of you in the field. I may never see my son again;
for the issue of the war may depend on the battles of the next few days."

"What do you mean?"

Mr. Raynes seemed to know more than he had dared to speak; and Somers was
full of interest.

"The Yankees, who expect to go into Richmond, will be driven down the
Peninsula, where they came up, like flying sheep, within a week. I have
heard a few words, which satisfies me that great events are coming."

Though it was not supposable that the people in the vicinity of Richmond
knew the plans of General Lee, from what he had seen, and from what he
had heard from men in power, he had formed a very correct idea of the
intended operations of the rebel chief; and he stated his views very
clearly to Somers. While he was listening to the old man's theory, Mrs.
Raynes had spread her table, and placed upon it such food as was
available for a hasty lunch. She insisted that he should partake; and,
while he enjoyed the welcome refreshment, Mr. Raynes told him everything
about the movements of the Confederate army in the vicinity, with full
particulars of the battle of the preceding day. While the scout was thus
answering the ends of his mission, he was in no hurry to depart.

General McClellan's "change of base" was not suspected by the rebels at
this time. It was their purpose to flank the Union army on the right and
left, and destroy it effectually. The dispositions had been made for this
purpose; and, as Mr. Raynes was a man of influence and intelligence, his
information was as reliable as could be deduced from the preliminary
movements of the rebel army. He was confident of success. The execution
of the plan had already been commenced, and the right of the Union line
was in the act of falling back.

He expatiated upon the perils of the campaign, and the terrible fighting
which was to be expected; and manifested the utmost solicitude for the
safety of his son, and hardly less for his guest.

Somers prolonged his repast, that the old man might leave nothing unsaid
that would be important for the Union generals to know. Sue occasionally
joined in the conversation; but she was quite serious now, as she
contemplated the perils to which her brother and her friend from Alabama
must be subjected.

"Do you know where General Jackson is now?" asked Somers.

"I don't know exactly where he is; but I know what part he has to play in
the great drama. The last we heard of him was, that he was watching
McDowell, near Fredericksburg. If McDowell keeps quiet, Jackson will rush
down on the left flank of the Yankees, and cut off their retreat."

"Are you sure?"

"I am very sure. I can tell you why."

Before he had time to tell him why, a knock at the door disturbed the
conference; and a young man, in a tattered rebel uniform, was ushered
into the room.


CHAPTER XII

THE DIGNIFIED YOUNG REBEL


Lieutenant Somers, who had been very nervous and uneasy before, was
exceedingly annoyed by the appearance of another actor on the stage. He
had become in some slight degree familiarized with the awkwardness of his
situation; for the fact, that no suspicion had yet been cast upon his
identity, was encouraging, and he began to have some confidence in his
position, open as it was to an assault from any direction. The advent of
the tattered stranger was a new cause for alarm, and he at once became
very anxious to beat a retreat.

There is no night without some ray of light to gladden it. His first
impression was that the visitor belonged to the Fourth Alabama, and would
readily recognize him as an impostor; but he was in a measure relieved to
find that none of the family gave the soldier more than a friendly
greeting, which proved him to be a stranger to them as well as to
himself. Yet he might belong to the Fourth Alabama; and then it occurred
to him that the man had come to inform Mr. Raynes of the death of his son
while on picket duty.

In the brief period which elapsed between the advent of the stranger, and
the statement of the object of his visit, Somers was disturbed by a dozen
fearful theories; all of which seemed to end in a rebel prison at
Richmond, and even in a rebel gallows--the fate of the spy. The minutes
were fearfully long; and, before the momentous question of the object of
the stranger's visit could be introduced, he decided to make an abrupt
retreat.

"Well, Mr. Raynes," said he, approaching the old man as he put on his
cap, "I have already run a great risk in stopping here so long; and, with
many thanks to you for your kindness and for your generous hospitality, I
must take my departure."

"I suppose we cannot keep you any longer, Allan; but you must promise to
call again at the first convenient opportunity."

"I promise you that I will the first time I can safely do so," responded
Somers warmly, and with the fullest intention of redeeming his promise.
"Good-by, sir!"

"Good-by, my dear boy! May you be spared in the hour when the strong men
bite the dust!" said Mr. Raynes solemnly, as he gave his hand to Somers.

"Good-by, Sue!" added the young lieutenant, taking the hand of the
Virginia damsel.

"Adieu, my brave soldier-boy!" she replied.

"You are a soldier, I see," said the stranger, as Somers approached him
on his way out of the house.

"Yes, sir," answered the latter nervously; for he would gladly have
escaped any communication with the newcomer.

"What regiment do you belong to?" persisted the dilapidated soldier.

What business was that to him? Why should he trouble himself about other
people's affairs? It sounded like a very impertinent question to the
excited lieutenant, and he was tempted to inform the busy-body that it
was none of his business; but, as he had already earned a good character
for civility with the interesting family in whose presence he still
stood, his bump of approbation would not permit him to forfeit their
esteem by so inconsiderate a reply.

"Good-by, all!" said he with energy, turning away from the rebel soldier,
and moving towards the door.

"What regiment did you say you belonged to?" demanded the persistent
rebel.

"I didn't say," replied Somers, not in the most gentle tones.

"Will you oblige me by telling me to what regiment you belong?" added the
rebel.

"I think I will not," continued Somers, more and more displeased with the
persistence of the other. "I came very near being arrested as a deserter
just now, though I have a pass in my pocket; and I don't care about
exposing myself to any further annoyance by my own indiscretion."

"I assure you I am a friend, and I would not betray you if I knew you
were a deserter," said the stranger in very civil tones.

Thus appealed to, and perceiving that he was not gaining in the
estimation of Mr. Raynes by his reticence, he decided that he could not
make the matter much worse by answering the question.

"To the Fourth Alabama," he replied desperately; "but you must excuse me;
for I am in a tremendous hurry."

"The Fourth Alabama! I thought so," exclaimed the stranger with a
pleasant smile, as though the information was particularly agreeable to
him. "I belong to the Fourth Alabama myself."

"Do you, indeed?" added Somers with the most intense disquiet, wishing
all the time that the soldier had been in Alabama, or anywhere but in the
house of Mr. Raynes.

"Can you tell me where the regiment is?"

"I cannot. I have been looking for it myself for the last two hours. As I
can be of no assistance to you, you will excuse me if I leave you."

"Not so fast, comrade; I will go with you. I have some directions which I
think will enable us to find the regiment; and, if you please, I will
bear you company."

Somers did not please; but he could hardly refuse the offer without
exciting the suspicion of the family, which he felt might be fatal to
him. It would be better to depart with the member of the Fourth Alabama,
and part company with him by force of stratagem when they had left the
house.

"I won't keep you waiting but a minute. I called here to see my friends;
but none of them seem to know me. You are Mr. Raynes, I presume?"
continued the soldier, addressing the old man.

"I am; but I don't remember to have ever seen you before," replied the
farmer.

"You never did, sir; but I will venture to say that my name is well known
in this house," added the soldier with a mysterious smile, which caused
Somers to dread some new development that would compromise him.

"Ah!" said Mr. Raynes, ever ready to welcome any one who had the
slightest claim upon his hospitality.

"I am well acquainted with your son, Owen; I suppose I shall not be
disputed here, when I say that he is the best fellow in the world. Don't
you know me now?" demanded the tantalizing rebel, who appeared to be very
anxious to have his identity made out in the natural way, and without any
troublesome explanations.

"Really, I do not," answered Mr. Raynes, much perplexed by the confident
manner of the visitor.

"This is Sue, I suppose?" pursued the soldier, advancing to the maiden,
and extending his dirty hand; which, however, was not much dirtier than
that which she had so eagerly grasped before. "Don't you know who I am,
Sue?"

"I do not, sir," she replied rather coldly.

"When I tell you that I belong to the Fourth Alabama, don't you know me?"

"I do not, sir."

"And when I tell you that I am the intimate friend of your brother Owen?"

Allan Garland stood by the door; and, of course, it was not he; therefore
she could not, by any possibility, conceive who he was; and she said so,
in terms as explicit as the occasion required.

"I live in Union, Alabama, when I am at home. Don't you know me _now_,
Sue?" persisted the perplexed visitor, who, perhaps, began to think he
had entered the wrong house.

If the veritable Allan Garland, however little his photograph resembled
him, had not stood by the door, she would have been rejoiced to see him,
and to recognize in him her unknown friend and correspondent. As it was,
she did not know him; and she was candid enough to express her conviction
without reserve, in spite of the disagreeable effect which her want of
perception seemed to produce upon the mind of the stranger.

"This is very strange," said the soldier, taking off his cap, and rubbing
his head to quicken his faculties, which seemed to have led him into some
unaccountable blunder. "Will you be kind enough to inform me who lives in
this house?"

"Mr. Raynes," replied Sue, quite as much mystified as the stranger seemed
to be.

"There is some mistake; but I can't make out what it is," said the
stranger.

"I cannot wait any longer," said Somers, who had been riveted to the spot
by the astounding revelation to which he had just listened.

He had been almost paralyzed by the words of the rebel, in whom he
promptly recognized the young man whose name and antecedents he had
borrowed for the present occasion. His first impression was to take to
his heels, and to run away; but a certain worldly prudence prevented him
from adopting this doubtful policy. If you attempt to run away from an
angry dog, he will certainly bite you; whereas, by facing him boldly, you
may escape all injury. This fact, which Somers had fully exemplified in
his own experience before he left Pinchbrook, was the foundation of his
action. Seeing that the stranger was perplexed and annoyed by the failure
of the family to recognize him, even after he had told them everything
except his name, he decided that he might safely retire under the plea of
haste.

"I beg your pardon, sir, for this intrusion," said the soldier, blushing
with mortification as he retreated a pace towards the door. "You will
excuse me, Miss Raynes, for my unwarrantable familiarity; but I have made
a blunder, or you have," he added rather bitterly. "Perhaps, when Owen
comes to introduce me, you will know me better."

"Owen's friends are my friends, young man; and you are as welcome as my
son would be, whoever you are."

"Thank you, sir; but, with many regrets for this intrusion, I will take
my leave."

"No, no, my young friend," interposed the old man. "You must not leave us
in this manner. It is true, we do not recognize you; but you are none the
less welcome on that account."

"Thank you kindly, sir. I have deceived myself into the belief that I was
better known here than I find I am. It was weak in me to thrust myself
across your threshold without an introduction; and, if you will pardon
me, I will leave you, with the promise to come again with Owen."

"Not yet, sir; at least, not till you have told us who you are."

"Excuse me; but I must go now," replied the young rebel with an
exhibition of gentle dignity, which quite won the heart of Somers, as it
did that of the family.

"Pray, give me your name, sir," interposed Sue, whose woman's curiosity
could no longer endure the silence which maidenly reserve had imposed
upon her, especially as the stranger proposed to depart without solving
the mystery.

"You'll excuse me, Miss Raynes, if I decline for the present. My comrade
is in a desperate hurry, and it is not reasonable for me to detain him
any longer."

"But, young man, you wrong me, you wrong my daughter, and above all, you
wrong my son, who is your friend, by leaving in this manner," said Mr.
Raynes earnestly. "You actually charge us with a want of hospitality by
this abrupt withdrawal."

"You will pardon me, sir, for saying it; but after the description I have
given of myself, if you do not know me, I am compelled to believe that it
is because you do not wish to know me."

"That is very unjust, and we do not comprehend the force of the remark."

"Why, sir, I have written to you, and to your daughter, and your daughter
has written to me; and now you seem never to have heard of me. I have
told you that I reside in Union, Alabama; and that I am a friend of
Owen."

"We know a young man from that town very well, though we never saw him.
His name is Allan Garland; but it is impossible that you should be the
person."

"I must go, comrade," said Somers desperately, as he rushed out of the
door.

"Wait a moment!" exclaimed Mr. Raynes, grasping him by the arm; for the
old farmer seemed to think his presence was necessary to the perfect
unraveling of the mystery. "It seems to me you ought to know this young
man, if none of us do."

"I do not, Mr. Raynes; never saw him before in my life," protested
Somers, feeling very much like a condemned criminal.

"My name is Allan Garland," quietly continued the dignified young rebel.
"I am, undoubtedly, the person to whom you allude."

"Impossible!" exclaimed Mr. Raynes, still holding Somers's arm with the
grasp of a vise.

"Impossible!" almost shouted the fair Sue, more excited than she would
have been, if, through patient reading, she had arrived at the last
chapter of a sensational novel, where the pin is pulled out and all the
villains tumble down to perdition and all the angels stumble upon their
apotheosis.

"Impossible!" chimed in Mrs. Raynes, who had preserved a most remarkable
silence, for a woman, during the exciting incidents we have transcribed.

"May I be allowed to inquire why you think it is impossible?" calmly
demanded the gentle rebel, who, in his turn, was amazed at the singular
course of events.

Sue did not know what else to do; so she sat down in a chair, and laughed
with hysterical vehemence at the strange aspect of the affair. The old
man opened his eyes, and opened his mouth; but he did not forget to hold
on with all his might to the arm of the unfortunate lieutenant, who was
just then picturing to himself the interior of a rebel dungeon; which
view suddenly dissolved into an indistinct representation of a tree, from
a stout limb of which was suspended a rope, hanging down over a
cart--these latter appurtenances being symbolical of the usual rebel
method of hanging a spy.

The affair, which had been growing desperate for some time, had now
actually become so to poor Somers. He placed his hand upon his revolver,
in the breast-pocket of his coat; but some prudential considerations
interposed to prevent him from using it. The house was on a line of rebel
sentinels. Whole divisions of Confederate infantry, artillery and
cavalry, were encamped around him, and any violent movement on his part
would have been sure to result in an ignominious disaster. The doughty
old farmer, who was not less than six feet three in his stockinged feet,
held on to him as a drowning man clings to a floating spar. It was not
possible to get away without resorting to violence; and if he offered any
resistance to what, just then, looked like manifest destiny, the rebel
soldier would become an ally of the farmer, and the women could call in
the sentinels, if nothing more.

"Really, Mr. Raynes, you are very unkind to detain me, when I tell you
that my leave has nearly expired," said Somers, when he had fully
measured the situation; which, however, was done in a tithe of the time
which we have taken to transcribe it.

"Young man, there is some _mistake_," said Mr. Raynes, placing a wicked
emphasis on the word, which went to the very core of the scout's heart.
"This man says he is Allan Garland, and you say you are Allan Garland.
One of you is an impostor. Neither of you shall go till we determine
which is the one. Sue, bring out your photograph again."

"Oh, dear!" gasped Somers, as in a fit of momentary despondency, he gave
himself up for lost, when the maiden went for the picture.


CHAPTER XIII

AN UNEXPECTED ARRIVAL


Miss Sue hastened to procure the photograph, which she had placed in her
mother's room after it had been fully discussed by herself and the
supposed original. At the same time, her father conducted Somers into the
room again; and, being fully conscious of his desire to get away, he kept
a watchful eye upon him, though he removed his grasp from the arm. The
rebel soldier looked on in utter amazement at the singular proceedings of
all the party, and seemed utterly unable to comprehend the meaning of
them.

"Here is the picture," said Sue, returning with the photograph in her
hand; "but I don't see that it looks any more like you than it does like
the other gentleman;" and she proceeded to institute a comparison between
the new claimant and the picture.

Somers began to cherish a faint hope again, and to be very grateful for
the general truth, that photographs do not always look like the
originals. This encouragement, slight as it was, gave our hero a new
inspiration, and in a measure restored his impudence; which, under the
pressure of circumstances, had begun to give way.

"I am sure it does not look at all like you," continued Sue, after she
had patiently balanced all the points of resemblance, and all the points
of disagreement.

"You should remember that the picture was taken more than a year ago; and
that I have been an invalid for ten months of the time," suggested the
rebel soldier.

"That may be; but I am sure this picture could never have been taken for
you."

"Let me see it, if you please?"

Sue handed him the card, and he glanced at it with an expression of great
curiosity.

"Where did you get this picture?" demanded he.

"It was sent to me by the original," replied she.

"This is not my picture."

"That is just what the other gentleman said; and I am perfectly willing
to believe both of you."

"But I sent you a picture of myself, though this is not the one."

"Well, that is very singular."

"If you will remember, there were two in the same letter; the other was a
young man whom Owen was acquainted with, and who desired something to
remember him by. He is in a Mississippi regiment now."

"Dear me! what a blunder!" exclaimed Sue, laughing heartily. "I am sure I
took the best looking of the two for Allan Garland's."

"Perhaps that is not very complimentary to me; but where is the other
picture?"

"I put it in Owen's room. I told him what I had done with the two
pictures; but he has been at home so little, that I suppose he never
looked at them. I will get the other."

"We are beginning to get a little light on the subject," said Mr. Raynes,
when his daughter had left the room.

"And I think you will let a little light through my body with a
bullet-hole," added Somers, whose last hope was gone again, though his
impudence still remained.

"Be patient, young man; we shall soon see the mystery explained, and be
able to inform you whether you are Allan Garland or not."

This was my step-father in September 1841 due to disability Ganz grace
with a salary of two dollars per month from the service on the 40th
Infantry Regiment had been dismissed.

Cause of disability was the loss of the voice command as a result of a
throat inflammation, which later also in tuberculosis degenerate.
He had, after cessation of his position in the regiment for almost two
years as a police corporal in the military hospital in Mainz acts
and had then temporarily replace a station supervisor at the
county-Korrektionsanstalt Brauweiler adopted in Cologne.

His real intention was, at the Post Office to enter into service. But
then there was the postal sector is still in stagnation. Should a body be
filled, it usually had only one previous position holder die or retire
before this was released.

Indicative of the nature of the postal service this time is that when my
step-father in the summer of 1844 after Ostrowo wrote to his
brother, he needed an official authorization for his marriage to
obtain, it is based on the address of the chance in my hands are
letter noted: "sender asks for early delivery."

The appointment letter was then apparently a rare and offending. The
desired position at the Post Office as a letter carrier was my
step-father after several years of waiting finally offered in October
1846 when he was just on the bier was.

We moved in late 1844 after Brauweiler on. My father is now here in the
great provincial prison service certainly the heaviest.

He was, among other things, prison warden of the prisoners who are
there for the work was Häusler, because of misconduct in the prison
have been sentenced to prison.

The Institute formed a large complex of buildings and courtyards and
enclosed gardens and land. All this was with a high wall moved. Men, women
and juvenile inmates were separated.

In order for the house arrest to get where our house was, you had to walk
for several yards, through the heavy locked doors were separated. The
house arrest was therefore of every human isolated environment. Every
once dusk arrived, flew dozens of owls of all sizes with their Gefauche
and Gekrächze around the building and children chasing us fear one. The
stay of these owls was the tower of the nearby church. Also, this stay was
for us children, and probably also for my parents, not enjoyable. The
service of my father, the clock at 5 am and started until late in
the evening lasted, was a very tiring and a lot of anger linked.

The nature of those prisoners was a cruel treatment. I have more than once
with views that young and older men who were punished extra hard
to join the appalling closing procedure of the knee had to undergo.

Close This Krumm is that the delinquent on the bottom of the cell
to the abdomen had to be. Then he got hand and created Leg. That was his
right hand on his back across to the left foot and the left hand also
on the back of the right foot shackled. That was not enough, was
it a linen-like cloth cord around the body on the chest and arms
on the back of sharply drawn together.

So as a live ball zusammengeschnürt, had the perpetrators Uebel two
hours lying on her stomach to endure. Then his shackles were removed, but
a few hours after the procedure began again. The roar and moaning so
abused durchtönte the entire building and made the course for us children
to a gruesome impression. Here in Brauweiler I have already visited
the autumn of 1844 from only vierundeinhalb years old, the village
school, and while I was in this young age as a "volunteer" recorded.

We returned from the children back, so we had one of the prison gates
to happen, which is a sign guard had to open. One day, but we were stiff
against surprise when the post opened the door and we instead of
the hitherto unprecedented in the use shako a shining helmet of a
very significant amount on his head, saw enthroned.

These early helmets were compared with their successors in the now
moment, factories and correspondingly difficult. We recovered from our
surprise us and to our amazement, only when the item zuherrschte
us: "Guys, make that you come in or I'll beat you the door in front
of the nose!"

Life for us children in the prison was not very varied .

It is played on the merits of a part within the prison walls. It was also
our father, a man was very strict and it is not lacking in anger,
always irritable, an irritability, by now he came to the outbreak
tuberculosis grew more and more.

The mother and we children were among many to suffer.

More than once had the mother of the father in the arms, if this
excessive arousal in severe corporal punishment to us unfold. Beatings
are the highest outflow educational wisdom, then I must be a true
man's pattern.

But what I become I, I was probably in spite of the beatings. On the
other hand, it was the father onto busy for our well-tried, because
he was nevertheless a kind man he could, for example at Christmas,
Easter or New Year's a pleasure to prepare, so it happened, as far
as the modest resources allowed.

And these were very modest. In addition to free housing (two rooms), heating
and lighting the father received a monthly salary around eight
thalers.

Thus, five, later four people live, since my youngest brother, a handsome
building child and the favorite of the father, died in the summer of 1845.
The illness of my father made Among rapid progress. On 19 October 1846,
he died after about two years of marriage. So my mother was within three
years of the second widow and fatherless we orphans.

From this marriage the mother had no right to state support. Now, nothing
remained but to their homeland after Wetzlar überzusiedeln. Again in
early November were the seven things on a cart loaded - the furniture
truck today, there were probably at that time not yet - and was to
travel to Cologne begun.

The weather was ugly. It was cold and rainy. In Cologne, the household
on the Rhine under the open sky on the pavement in order to build
from there by ship to Koblenz and then again by the car Lahntal up
to Wetzlar to be transported.

When we clock at 10 pm the ship's cabin on the journey to Koblenz
entered, it was overcrowded with people and there was a choking smoke
tobacco.

Since we have no place did we put two boys were dead tired as we ourselves
close to the door on the floor and slept as only tired children
can sleep.

The fifth or sixth day we finally arrived in Wetzlar, where my grandmother
was still married, and four siblings - three sisters and a brother - my
mother lived. Our actual youth verlebten now here we are.

Wetzlar, a small, romantic city, then had a great elementary school. First
of all, we both came into the arms of school, which is in a large
building, the German house, formerly the German Order of Knights
belonged, was located.

In the large courtyard to this building is left, the one-house,
where Charlotte Buff, the heroine in Goethe's Werther, lived.

The coincidence would have it, I later mehreremal stayed in this
house, as one of my cousins Cicerone for the Charlotte-Buff-room was.

I can also celebrate the centenary of Goethe's birthday (1849) recall the
fountain Wildbacher held woselbst the Goethe Linde is located.

The fountain is since that time Goethe wells.

Ten years later I lived celebration of Schiller's hundredth birthday
at the theater in Salzburg city.

After a few years the school with poor citizens merged school, we
students were called now free, the girls received the house as a German
schoolhouse instructed. With the school and the teachers, I found me in
the whole very good, just not with the cantor, the hold was not me.

I was one of the best students, especially our teachers of geometry, a
small beautiful man who led me to make two extra mates and to us
in the mysteries of mathematics einzuweihen.

We learned how to calculate logarithms.

In addition to arithmetic and geometry were my favorite subjects history
and geography.

Religion, for which I had no sense - and my mother, an educated woman and
freethinkers, tormented us at home not so - I only learned because I
had to. I was even here in the first place, but that does not prevent me,
especially in the upper Katechumenenstunde the priest several times
gave answers that do not fit into the scheme and myself
Criminal small sermons eintrugen. Furthermore, our upper pastor is a very
honorable man and Frömmling not quite, but, incidentally, not prevented
him one day, right in one night, played a loose string. In Wetzlar
existed at that time the custom, it is perhaps even today, in the
late fall or winter slaughtered geese a night of Durchfrierung
suspend, let the taste of the roast promote.

The goose was so in a respectful level, usually by hanging before
the window.

So even at upper priest. But the next morning, the goose was gone. On
the other hand, depended on the following morning, the neatly
abgenagte skeleton of the goose on the doorstep Glockenzug and
attached a card on which stood the beautiful Verslein: Good morning,
Mr.

Schwager! Yesterday, I was fat and now I'm skinny! Wetzlar Ganz laughed,
because in a small town to talk about such incidents quickly.

I suppose, even the top priest laughed.

But when I learned diligently, and throughout the skill with standing
at the top, so I stood at the forefront of most loose pranks, the
boys now, the greater freedom of movement, inevitably or even
understand.

That put me in "moral" relationship into a nasty reputation. Specifically,
I enjoyed this with our cantor, the Department of the exterior had
to be represented, that is, all of the evil tricks of the school
were to punish the perpetrators had.

Why he, rather than the rector, came to this role, I do not know.

Perhaps that his seniority or his body, or a plethora customary law predestined
him to do so. Also, he knew with inimitable grace and very effective
to oscillate the Bakel.

Less hurt it when he and his little fat hands us the right and drove
left into the face that there is only so clapped. But even in such a
moment, I could not let the small fat hands to admire. Haupttummelplätze
We were the nearest surroundings of the cathedral, the old kingdom
Kammergericht building, whose large areas for many years as a
restaurateur served Camp, the great castle ruins Kalsmunt before
the city, lots of rocks in the sheaf Heimer Chaussee - the place
home Garbe also has memories of Goethe - in whose rocks our "forts
"built, the old city walls and especially on a high plateau situated
Garbe Heimer waiting from us in the autumn of our raids in the
potato fields went to roast potatoes for download.

One day we had to give an several siege by a peasant family to endure, but
we are victorious abschlugen.

The Streifereien through woods and fields, especially during the
holidays, were innumerable.

It was also the fruit stripping, as we called it, a favorite activity
during summer and autumn, because the environment Wetzlar is a very
rich fruit.

The Lahn, a very respectable river, in the summer gave the desired
swimming and in winter the opportunity to skate sports.

At one such occasion it happened that my brother beside me hard in
a frozen hole collapse easily and unambiguously under the ice and
drowning would be advised, he did not unwittingly spread the arms
that held him up.

A buddy and I pulled him out of the water and brought him to a rock
at the sheaf Heimer Chaussee. Here he had to undress, we borrowed him
some clothes from us and then wrestled his clothes, which we in
the unusually warm February sun dried.

The mother found out only months after the accident her second,
which was made possible that we even cleaned our clothes, even went
so well there, even patched to the cracks of the eye of the mother
to hide.

The following year, I helped one of my cousins, who was several
years older than I, when a similar opportunity to save the life.

This an excellent ice rider, came one day in the Lahn sausender
ride down and drove to a dam, although it is a result of the mirror
naked ice did not see that before the weir is a broad strip was
open water.

Full horror I screamed to him to reverse. He also obeyed. But it was
too late. When he described the alternate sheets, he broke. Convulsions
prison, he finds on the ice, but when he attempted a leg on the
same to bring it broke again.

Quickly I pulled a long knitted woolen scarf, as they were then generally
worn by the throat, took a second from a comrade standing next to
me, linked together, and threw one end to my cousin, which he happily
erhaschte.

Now we moved it slowly to solid ice.

He was rescued. My worse reputation with our cantor was gradually so firmly
established that he is as obviously presupposes that I have any
devilry, which occurred, was involved.

I tried once before a comrade unjust punishment to protect myself by getting
into the funding for this set, so I was without mercy as a participant
and mitbestraft, even though I was completely uninvolved.

Later, I was in the party, the property at any price to fulfill his
wish, as a joke Meierei angekreidet justice.

Often enough, however, was our cantor legitimate cause me to go
into court.

So when I one day, the dark shoots after "celebrity" Following in the
red sandstone steps to the entrance to the cathedral in lapidary letters
my full name, birthplace and birthday eingemeißelt had. A strong nail
than a chisel and a hammer stone as were the tools I used to. Of course,
the evil deed on the next Sunday at the church discovered on all
sides, even by the cantor.

End result: occurring to any three slaps in the face and left for lunch.
This meant that I am by the end of the school in the morning until the
start of the afternoon in the "cell" had to spend, so after closing the
second school came home and then losing my lunch.

Fortunately, however, had one of Kantor weichmütige daughter. These observed
me at the side of her husband, when I am on the second lunch
Karzerfenster stood and philosophical considerations about the
freedom of the sparrows in place, on the schoolyard in their droves
noise.

From my fate stirred I obtained it with her father now a full
amnesty, and even came to me the freedom and announce me from prison to
dismiss. It was the first and only pardon, which I received in my
life has become.

Had the Ewigweibliche more about my destiny to decide, I think I would be
sometimes better of them came.

Indes came to me the day of recognition, in which I said, now you
have yet to start, an ordinary guy to be. This act took place also.

The son of the majors in Wetzlar garnisonierenden Hunter Battalion,
Moritz VG, was my sidekick for many countless been brushing.

Then came the school exams.

The only man who from the same population as the audience attendance
was Major VG, a giant in shape.

The test was ended and the grades were read out. Strangely these were
exclusively on the moral behavior that would be issued. All pupils in the
class had already received their censorship, only VG Moritz and I were
left. We just received the censorship five, so the worst that it
gave.

The father made no major mine, but I have reason to believe that it
is at home for Moritz abging not lenient. I saw him since that day never
again, he came immediately after that operation at the Cadet School. In
the nineties, I learned that he is in a high K. military position held.
He did so his evil nature as little harm as I do. From that hour I was
ok, that means I did nothing more to me eintrug penalties. So, I got
the exam in the next three and censorship at the next and last test,
in which I participated, the One.

Would it then on the mood of the class arrived, I had one of the two came
to distribute premiums received. As rector of the name of the second
award winners wanted to mention, the whole class cried my name. The rector
said, however, I would myself be very improved, but not to the extent
a bonus for me to give. So I stepped into prämienlos life. * * * * * Our
physical conditions could not improve in Wetzlar. At retirement, my
mother does not qualify.

The only support they received from the state later, consisted of 15
silver pennies per month and the head of our two boys. These had been
granted her, because she, despite the advice against her first
husband, both of us as candidates for the military orphanage in Potsdam
had. It was the plight that they were obliged, they had their now
deceased mother five to six inherited land parcels within the district
to various Wetzlar were scattered around. And they had, of necessity
obeying, even several of them already sold, in order to be able to
live. But this sale was difficult to warm her. Her whole costume
densities and was aimed at us the remaining property to get, so
we are not entirely destitute of the world would.

What a mother for her children to sacrifice, I am on their own experience.
Some years my mother had for her brother - a shoemaker hand - white military
gloves stitched leather, the pair for 6 cruisers, about 20 pfennig.
More than a couple a day but they could not justify. This salary was too
little to live, to die too much.

But this work had to abandon after a few years, because she was now
of tuberculosis have been taken to it in recent years all work
impossible.

I am the eldest was the order of the small house care, room and
board, take over.

Somers did not know, had never tried the experiment, and was utterly
opposed to all such practices. But he desired to conciliate the tipsy
general; and, if he had not been fearful of being put to the test, he
would have signified his belief that he could carry off half a dozen
glasses. As it was, he did not dare to belie his principles.

"Not any, sir! I never drink whiskey," he replied, with the utmost
deference in his tones.

"Hey?" gasped General M----, darting a sudden glance at the young man.

"I never drank a glass of whiskey in my life, sir," added Somers.

The general jumped off his camp-stool with a sudden jerk, and stared at
our lieutenant in silence for an instant.

"Give me your hand," said he.

Somers extended his hand.

"Yes! you are flesh and blood. You are the first man I ever saw that
never drank a glass of whiskey. You drink brandy, don't you?"

"No, sir! I never drank a glass of liquor or wine of any kind in my
life."

"Give me your hand," said the general again.

"Flesh and blood! You are the first man I ever saw that never drank a
glass of liquor or wine of any kind. 'Tis a bad practice," he added with
an oath.

"I think so, sir," replied Somers with due deference.

"Young man!"

"Sir."

"The greatest enemy--hic--that the Confederate army has to contend
against is whiskey. Yes, sir! whiskey. If the Confederate States
of--hic--of America ever win their independence, it will be when the
whiskey's all gone."

"I am very glad to hear officers of your high rank condemning the
practice," said Somers, alive to the joke of the general's proceedings,
but prudently looking as serious as though it had been a solemn tragedy
instead of an awful farce.

"Yes, sir! I'm opposed with all my might to the practice. Yes, sir!
Whiskey is the greatest enemy I have on the face of the footstool, young
man."

Somers believed him.

"Always be temperate, young man. You are in the sunshine of--hic--of
life. Never drink whiskey. It will ruin your body and soul. Don't touch
it, young man," added he, as he sank back on the camp-stool, whose center
of gravity was nearly destroyed by the shock, and closed his eyes, as if
overcome by the potency of his great enemy, which was just then beginning
to have its full effect, and which produced a tendency to sleep.

"I will endeavor to profit by your good advice, sir," said Somers.

"That's right; do so," added the general, as he jerked up his head to
banish the drowsy god, who was struggling for the possession of his
senses. "That will do, young man. You may go now."

The general, in his drunken stupor, had certainly forgotten the business
for which Major Platner had brought him to the division headquarters; and
Somers began to fear that he should have no errand that day.

"I beg your pardon, general; but Major Platner was kind enough to say
that you had some service for me to perform."

"Eh?" demanded he, tossing up his head again.

Somers repeated the remark more explicitly than before.

"Exactly so; I remember. Do you know what I was thinking about just then,
young man?" said the general, spasmodically leaping to his feet again, as
though the thought was full of inspiration.

"No, sir; a man in my humble position could hardly measure the thoughts
of a great man in your situation."

"I'll tell you; I was thinking about issuing a division general order on
the subject of temperance. What do you think of it?"

"It would be an excellent idea," replied Somers.

"Young man!"

"Sir."

"I believe you said--hic----"

Somers did not say anything of the sort; but he waited patiently for the
rebel general to recover the idea which he appeared to have lost.

"I believe you said you never drank any whiskey?"

"I never did, sir."

"Then you never was drunk?"

"Never, sir."

"Young man!"

"Sir."

"Are you a--hic----"

Somers was not a "hic;" but he was an impatient young man, and very
anxious to be instructed in regard to his difficult and dangerous
mission.

"Are you a minister of the gospel?" demanded the general, after a mighty
effort.

"No, sir; I am not."

"I'm sorry for--hic--for that; for I wanted to appoint you a division
chaplain, to preach against whiskey to the general officers. Some of them
are--hic--drunken fellows, and no more fit for a command than the old
topers in the streets of Richmond."

"I am sorry I am not competent to fill the office; but I think, if you
should lecture them yourself, it would have a better effect."

"My words are--hic--powerless. They laugh when I talk to them about the
error of their ways," added he with a string of oaths, which seemed to
exhibit a further necessity for a chaplain on the division staff.

"I beg your pardon, sir; but I am afraid your interest in the moral
welfare of your officers----"

"That is it, young man!" interrupted the drunken general, catching at his
idea with remarkable promptness. "My interest in the moral welfare of
my--hic--of my officers! You are a trump, young man [big oath]. You are a
major now?"

"No, sir."

"Only a captain?"

"No, sir; nothing but a private."

"Then you shall be a captain. I haven't heard any such--hic--sentiments
as you expressed used in this division before. You ought to be a--hic--a
brigadier-general."

"Thank you, sir. You are very kind. I came to you for instructions in
regard to my mission over to the enemy."

"Bless me! yes; so you did. Well, I have not written them yet."

"I only want a pass from you, general, with such verbal instructions as
you may please to give me."

"So you do; the fact of it is, my interest in the moral welfare of my men
had driven the matter out of my mind."

The general called an orderly; and Somers was sent off to the adjutant
for the pass, which was given to him under the name he had assumed. When
he returned, the general was sound asleep on his camp-stool, rolling
about like a ship in a gale, with a prospect of soon landing at full
length on _terra firma_. Somers would gladly have received some military
information from the general, who was in a condition to tell all he knew;
which, however, could not have been much, under the circumstances. He
concluded that it would be best for him not to awaken the tipsy moralist;
and, after waiting a short time on the spot to avoid suspicion, he joined
Major Platner, who was smoking his cigar under a tree near the
headquarters.

"Well, young man, did you obtain your instructions?"

"Yes; all I require."

"Perhaps we ought to have seen the general before dinner," added the
major, using the remark as a "feeler" to induce his companion to inform
him what had transpired during the interview.

"Perhaps it would have been more agreeable to the general. However, he
seemed to be in a very talkative mood."

"He commonly is after dinner."

"He is a very jovial, good fellow."

"Very."

"But he appears to feel a deep interest in the moral welfare of those
under his command. He expressed himself as very averse to habits of
intemperance."

"Humph!" coughed the major.

"He said that whiskey was the great enemy the army has to contend
against, and intends to issue a general order directed at the vice of
intemperance."

"Did he?"

"He did; but I ought to add, that he took me to be a major in the
service; a mistake which was very natural, since I wore no coat."

"Very natural--after dinner," replied Major Platner suggestively.

"I told him I never drank any strong drink; and he kindly advised me
never to do so."

"The general is a brave man, and I hope he will be able to overcome all
his enemies."

The major permitted the conversation to go by default, and Somers
respectfully dropped a pace or two behind him. They reached the brigade
headquarters, and then repaired to the guard tent, from which the scout
took his departure upon his arduous and difficult mission, with the best
wishes of the rebel officers.

With his pass he had no difficulty in going through any line, and made
his way down to the woods on the left of the open fields. He began to
feel easier when he had passed the field-works, and experienced a
sensation of exultation as he thought of the reception which awaited him
at headquarters as well as in the regiment.


CHAPTER XV

THE SHARPSHOOTER IN THE WOODS


Somers found the picket guard nearer the rebel line than he had
anticipated; but the exhibition of his pass, which had been prepared with
special reference to this purpose, prevented any long detention, though a
sergeant had to be called who was scholar enough to read the mysterious
document.

"I reckon you haven't got the best place to go through," said the
sergeant, after he had examined the pass, and satisfied himself of its
correctness.

"Why not?"

"There's a whole squad of Yankees a good piece in there," he replied,
pointing in the direction of the Federal lines. "They've been there all
day watching for something."

"What do they want?"

"There was a man run through the line this forenoon from their side, and
I reckon they are trying to find him."

"Was he a Yank?" asked Somers, desirous of obtaining their idea of the
fugitive.

"Dunno what he was. We didn't see him till he got a good piece behind us.
We were chasing the Yanks who run away when they saw us."

This was satisfactory to our scout; for the sergeant appeared to have no
knowledge that would be dangerous to him, and none of the graybacks
recognized the pants he wore. He advanced cautiously, as though he was
afraid of stumbling upon the squad of Yankees described by the sergeant,
till he could no longer be seen by the pickets. The last obstacle seemed
to be overcome; and he hastened to the place where he had concealed his
uniform, which he wished to put on before he approached the pickets on
the other side. It was now nearly dark, and he had no time to spare; for,
if he approached his own men in the darkness, he would be in danger of
being shot before they discovered who he was, though he had full
confidence in the discretion of Hapgood.

Without difficulty, he found the place where he had concealed his
clothes; and, after assuring himself that none of the rebel pickets were
in sight, he hastily put them on. To prevent any unpleasant suspicions,
he took the precaution to hide the gray pants he had worn, in the long
grass of the swamp, so that they need not attract the attention of any
stroller who might pass in that direction. Though we have frequently held
our hero up as a model of modesty, we are compelled to acknowledge that
he felt exceedingly well satisfied with himself on the present occasion.
He felt that he had done what, in the homely vocabulary of the boys of
Pinchbrook, might well be called "a big thing."

He had fully and successfully accomplished the arduous purposes of his
mission. He had examined the positions, and counted the forces of the
rebels. He had received very valuable information from Mr. Raynes, and
from others whom he had encountered in his walk through the enemy's
lines. He was satisfied that he should receive a warm welcome from those
who had sent him upon the perilous tour. He had earned the first bar to
his shoulder-straps, and was proud of his achievement.

The work had been done, and he was within a short distance of the Union
lines--within a short distance of the devoted Hapgood, who was patiently
but anxiously waiting to give him a soldier's reception. Above all, he
was safe; and he trembled when he thought of the perils through which he
had passed, of the consequences which must have followed the discovery of
his real character. As he thanked God for the boon of life after the
battle was over, so now he thanked Him for the signal success which had
crowned his labors in the good cause. The last article of his raiment was
put on and adjusted; he rose from the ground to walk towards the Union
lines.

"I say, Yank, you look better'n you did 'fore yer changed your clothes,"
said a voice, which struck his ear with startling distinctness.

Somers looked in the direction from which the voice came, and discovered
a villainous-looking countenance, that had just risen from the tall
swamp-grass, within a couple of rods of the spot where he stood. The man
was unmistakably a rebel--one of the most savage and implacable of rebels
at that; such a character as we read of in connection with slave-hunts in
Mississippi, or "free fights" in Arkansas. He wore a long, tangled beard;
and his hair had probably never known the use of a comb. The grayback
looked as cool and impudent as though he was perfectly assured of his
prey, and intended to torture his victim with his tongue, as he would
with his knife or his rifle if occasion required.

"I say, Yank, you look better'n yer did 'fore yer changed your colors,"
repeated the rebel, as he received no reply to his first salutation.

Somers looked at him again; indeed, he had hardly taken his eyes off the
savage-looking fellow, who would have made a very good representative of
Orson in the fairy story. He held a rifle in his hand, the muzzle of
which could easily be brought to bear upon his victim. Our lieutenant at
once understood the humor of the fellow; and, having recovered his
self-possession in the momentary pause, he determined not to be behind
his foe either in word or in deed.

"I say, reb, when did you shave last?" demanded Somers, with something as
near akin to a laugh as he could manufacture for the occasion.

"'Fore you was born, I reckon, Yank," replied the rebel; "and I sha'n't
shave ag'in till after you're dead. But I reckon I sha'n't hev ter wait
long nuther."

"I suppose you don't know what a comb is for, do you?" continued Somers,
who was, however, thinking of some method by which he might get out of
this scrape.

"I reckon I've heerd about such things; but Joe Bagbone ain't a woman,
and don't waste his time no such way. I say, stranger, you've got about
three minutes more to live."

"How long?"

"Three minutes, stranger, I've sat here by them clothes, like a dog at a
'possum's nest, all the arternoon. Now I've treed the critter, and I'm
gwine to shoot him."

"Is that so?"

"That's so, stranger."

"Do you usually shoot any man you happen to meet in the woods?"

"Well, I don't reckon we do, every man; but some on 'em we does. I
calkilate you got on Tom Myers's clothes now, and yer shot the man 'fore
you took the rags."

"I didn't shoot him."

"No matter for that, stranger; he was shot by a Yank, and you've got to
settle the account."

Somers began to be of the same opinion himself. The grayback had
evidently found the clothes, and suspected the purpose for which they
were concealed. It was possible he had even more definite information
than this; for he seemed to be prepared for precisely what had taken
place.

"My friend----"

"I'm not your friend, stranger. You kin say anything you like, if yer
don't insult me; Joe Bagbone don't take an insult from any live man."

"Well, Joe Bagbone," continued Somers, who was disposed to parley with
the fellow to gain time, if nothing else, "if you shoot me, you will make
the worst mistake you ever made in your life; and I can prove it to you
in less than five minutes."

"No, yer can't, stranger. Don't waste yer time no such way. If yer want
ter say yer prayers, blaze away lively, 'cause three minutes aren't long
for a man to repent of all his sins."

"I have a pass from General M----, which permits me to go in safety
through these lines," persisted Somers. "The sergeant above just examined
it, and passed me through."

"Don't keer nothing about yer pass. I respects Jeff Davis just as much as
the best man in Mississip'. If yer had a pass from him, you mought as
well not have it as have it. Tom Myers was killed, and somebody's gwine
up for him."

"But I have important business on the other side."

"I knows that, stranger," replied the imperturbable Joe Bagbone. "It
don't make no difference."

"I am sent over by General M----. I belong to the Fourth Alabama."

"Shet up! Don't tell no lies, 'cause yer hain't got no time ter repent on
'em."

"Then, if I understand it, you mean to murder one of your own men in cold
blood."

"Nothin' of the sort; only gwine to shoot a Yank."

Somers looked into that hard, relentless eye; but there was not the
slightest indication of any change of purpose. He felt that he stood in
the presence of his executioner. All the errors of his past life crowded
upon him, and the grave seemed to yawn before him.

"Call the sergeant above, and he will satisfy you that I am all right,"
said he, making one more effort to move the villain from his wicked
purpose.

"Don't want the sergeant. Yer time's out, stranger."

"Let me call him, then."

"If yer do, I'll fire. Say yer prayers now, if yer mean ter; but I reckon
the prayers of a Yank ain't of much account," replied Joe with a sneer.

Somers stood within a few feet of a large tree. Joe had several times
raised his rifle to his shoulder; but, when he magnanimously offered his
victim the last moment of grace, he dropped it again; and our lieutenant,
taking advantage of this interval, darted behind the tree. Joe raised his
piece quicker than a flash; but he did not fire, for the reason that he
could not secure a perfect aim, and because he was sure of a better
opportunity. Our lieutenant, who had carefully preserved his revolver
during the various changes he had made in his dress, now took it from his
pocket, and prepared to contest the field like a man.

The grayback, chagrined at this movement on the part of his victim, whom
he had evidently intended to intimidate by his coolness and his ferocious
words, rose from his seat in the long grass, and moved towards the tree
behind which Somers had taken refuge. Probably he was not aware that the
Yankee was armed; for he adopted none of the precautions which such a
knowledge would have imposed upon any reasonable man.

"Come out from that tree, stranger, or you shall die like a hog, with a
knife; not like a man, with a rifle-ball."

"I intend to die by neither," said Somers resolutely, as he discharged
his pistol in the direction from which the voice of the grayback came;
for he dared not take aim, lest the bullet of the ruffian should pierce
his skull.

He might as well have fired into the air, so far as any injury to his
enemy was concerned; but the report had the effect to assure the rebel
that he was armed, and thus put an end to his farther advance in that
direction. Somers listened with intense anxiety to discover the next
movement of his wily persecutor. He had only checked, not defeated him;
and an exciting game was commenced, which promised to terminate only in
the death of one of the belligerents. Somers hoped that the discharge of
his pistol would bring the sergeant down to his relief; but then to be
discovered in Federal uniform was about equivalent to being shot by his
relentless foe, burning to revenge the death of Tom Myers.

The report of pistols and muskets was so common an occurrence on the
picket-lines as to occasion nothing more than a momentary inquiry. No one
came for his relief, or his ruin, as the case might be; and he was left
to play out the exciting game by himself. The grayback, with a wholesome
regard for the pistol, had retired beyond the reach of its ball, while he
was still a long way within rifle-range of his doomed enemy. Somers dared
not look out from the tree to obtain even a single glance at the foe; for
he knew how accurate is the aim of some of these Southern woodsmen. He
had nothing to guide him but the rustling of the dried branches beneath
his tread, or the occasional snapping of a twig under his feet.

Joe Bagbone, after retreating beyond pistol-shot from the tree, had
commenced describing a circle which would bring him into a position that
commanded a view of his concealed victim. It must be confessed that Joe's
tactics were singularly deficient in range; for nothing but a surprise
could make them successful. While he was moving a hundred rods to secure
his position, Somers could defeat his purpose by taking a single step. As
soon as he determined in what direction his persecutor was going, he
changed his position; and Joe discovered the folly of his strategy, and
sat down on a stump to await a demonstration on the part of his victim.

The game promised to be prolonged to a most unreasonable length; and
Somers, now in a measure secure of his life, was impatient to join his
anxious companions, with whom he had parted in the forenoon. He was
satisfied that Joe would never abandon the chase, and the slightest
indiscretion on his own part would result in instant death. It was a
fearful position, and one which was calculated to wear terribly upon his
nerves. He was anxious to bring the contest to a conclusion; and, while
he was debating in his own mind the chances of escaping by a sudden dash
in the direction of the Union lines, a happy thought in the way of
strategy occurred to him.

He had determined as nearly as he could the situation of his bull-dog
opponent, and thought that, if he could draw his fire, he might get out
of range of his rifle before it could be reloaded. Placing his cap on the
barrel of his pistol, he cautiously moved it over, just as it would have
appeared to the rebel if his head had been inside of it, and projected it
a little beyond the tree. He withdrew it suddenly two or three times to
increase the delusion in the mind of his enemy. He could not see the
effect of the stratagem; but he was hopeful of a satisfactory result. He
continued to repeat the operation with the cap, till he was confident Joe
was not to be fooled in this way. He was probably one of the
sharpshooters, and had too often fired at empty caps to be caught in this
manner when success depended upon the single charge of his rifle.

Somers did not despair, but slipped off his coat; and, rolling it up so
as to form the semblance of a head, he placed the cap upon the top of the
bundle, and cautiously exposed the "dummy" on the opposite side of the
tree. The crack of Joe's rifle instantly followed this exhibition, and
Somers felt the blow of the ball when it struck the cap. The critical
moment had come; and, without the loss of a second, our lieutenant darted
towards the Union lines. This movement was followed by a shrill yell from
the Mississippian, which might have been a howl of disappointment at his
failure; or it might have been intended to startle, and thus delay the
fugitive.

Somers had listened to that battle yell too many times to be moved by it,
especially when uttered by a single voice; and, with all the speed of
which his limbs were capable, he fled to the arms of his friends. Joe was
not content to give up the battle; and, dropping his rifle, he drew his
long knife, and gave chase. They made a long run of it; and it was only
ended when Tom heard the demand of his faithful sergeant--

"Who goes there?"

"Friend," gasped Somers, utterly exhausted by his exertions.

"Lieutenant Somers? God be praised!" replied Hapgood, instantly
recognizing his voice.


CHAPTER XVI

RETURN TO THE CAMP


The moment Somers was recognized, Hapgood and his party rushed forward,
rightly judging, from the rapidity of his motions, that he was pursued.
The sharp eye of the veteran sergeant was the first to perceive the
ferocious Mississippian, who, undaunted by the appearance of the Union
soldiers, continued the pursuit as long as there was even a gleam of hope
that he could overtake his intended victim. He was only a few paces
behind the lieutenant when the latter was discovered.

Hapgood raised his musket and fired, just as the implacable pursuer
abandoned the chase, and turned his steps back to the rebel line. He
staggered for a few paces more, and fell just as a dozen other muskets
were leveled at him. He appeared to have been hit in the leg; for he did
not fall flat upon the ground, as he would if he had been struck in a
vital part, but sank down to a sitting posture.

The Union men rushed up to him, and found that the supposition was
correct; the ball had passed through the fleshy part of his thigh,
disabling, but not dangerously wounding him. The ruffian--we do not call
him so because he was a rebel, but he was naturally and by education just
what the term indicates--was as savage and implacable as before.

"Better leave me where I am, Yanks," said he; "'case, if I get well, I
shall be the death of some of you. You kin shoot me through the head if
you like."

"Don't consarn yourself about us, reb," replied Hapgood. "We'll take good
care that you don't hurt yourself, or any one else, while you are in our
hands."

"Mebbe you will, Yanks; but, just as sure as you was born, I'll hev the
heart's blood of that younker as fotched Tom Myers down."

"Who's Tom Myers?" demanded the veteran.

"The man that you Yanks killed this forenoon."

"Whose heart's blood do you want?"

"That younker with the badge on his shoulder; the un I chased in."

"He didn't kill Tom Myers, or any other man."

"Show me the man, then," growled the rebel, now beginning to feel the
pain of his wound.

"I'm your man. I brought Tom Myers down," replied Hapgood, anxious to
remove any cause of peril from his _protégé_.

"Did yer?"

"Sartin I did; saw him drop when I fired."

"Then, stranger, yer kin make up yer mind to die like a hog within ten
days. I tell yer, Yank, there ain't bolts and bars enough in Yankee land
to keep me away from yer. You kin shoot me if yer like now, and that's
all the way yer kin save yerself."

"Well, reb, you are great at blowing; but I've seen a good many jest sich
fellers as you be. I've fit with 'em, and fit agin' 'em; and I tell you,
your uncle can take keer of just as many of you as can stand up between
here and sundown. Put that in your hopper, reb; and the sooner you dry
up, the sooner you'll come to your milk. We'll take keer on you like a
Christian, though you ain't nothin' but a heathen. Here, boys, make a
stretcher, and kerry him along. Take that jack-knife out of his hand
fust, and keep one eye on him all the time."

Having thus delivered himself, Sergeant Hapgood hastened to the spot
where Somers had seated himself on the ground to recover his wind and
rest his weary limbs. The terrible excitement of the last hour seemed to
fatigue him more than the previous labors of the whole day; and he was
hardly in condition to march to the division headquarters, where he was
to report the success of his mission.

"Oh, Tom--I mean Lieutenant Somers--I'm glad to see you!" exclaimed the
veteran as he grasped both the hands of the young soldier.

"Thank you, uncle; I'm just as glad to see you as you can be to see me,"
replied Somers.

"You're all tuckered out, Somers."

"I had to run for some distance, with the odds against me; but I shall
get rested in a little while."

The sergeant began to ask questions; and, as soon as he had recovered his
breath, Somers gave him a brief sketch of his adventures, dwelling mainly
on the last and most thrilling event of the day.

"I can hardly believe that I am alive and well after all that has
happened," said he in conclusion. "That was the most bloodthirsty villain
I ever encountered in the whole course of my life."

"If you say shoot him, leftenant, it shall be done quicker'n you can say
Jack Roberson," added Hapgood, indignant at the conduct of the savage
rebel.

"Of course, I don't say anything of that kind. It would be murder to do
anything of that sort while he is our prisoner."

"He desarves hanging more'n Kyd the pirate did; and if I had my way, he'd
swing afore sunrise to-morrow. He's a consarned heathen!"

"Never mind him; only keep him safe, and where he can't do any mischief;
for he is wicked enough to kill the man that feeds him."

"I'm only sorry I didn't hit him a little higher up, where I hit the
other feller this mornin'," added the veteran. "How do you feel now,
leftenant?"

"I am improving. I shall be ready to go with you in a few moments more."

After sitting on the stump half an hour longer, he was in condition to
march; but the danger was past, the tremendous excitement had subsided,
and his muscles, which had been strained up to the highest tension,
seemed to become soft and flaccid. The party passed the Union pickets,
and reached the headquarters of the division general, who had just
finished his supper.

"Somers! by all that is great and good!" exclaimed the general, who
probably never expected to see the scout again.

"I have come to make my report, sir," replied the lieutenant.

"You are all used up. You look as though you could hardly stand up."

"I am very tired, sir," added Somers languidly.

"Sit down, then. Here, Peter," he added, addressing his servant, "bring
in a glass of whiskey for Lieutenant Somers."

"Thank you, general; I never drink anything stronger than coffee."

"But a little whiskey would do you good in your present condition; you
need it."

"I thank you, general; I never drink whiskey, as I had occasion to say to
a rebel general of division to-day."

"Eh? 'Pon my conscience! Were you asked to drink by a rebel major-general?"
demanded the officer, greatly surprised at the statement of the scout

"Not exactly, sir. About the first question he asked me was, how much
whiskey I could drink without going by the board."

"Who was he? Bring coffee, Peter."

"General M----."

"So I supposed. He is a jovial, good-hearted fellow; but I'll wager my
shoulder-straps he was tight at the time," laughed the general.

"Very tight, sir."

"Well, he is a fighting man, drunk or sober; but I should rather lead
than follow him in action. Where have you been all day?"

"Shall I tell my story in full, or only give you the information I
obtained?"

"Tell the story, so that I can determine whether the information is good
for anything or not."

Somers drank the tin cup of coffee which the general's servant brought to
him, and then proceeded to relate the incidents of the day in the rebel
camp. His distinguished auditor, who, in the Army of the Potomac, had
well earned the title of "the bravest of the brave," listened with eager
interest to the details of the lieutenant's story, asking occasional
questions upon points which were not only calculated to elicit particular
information, but to display the skill and intelligence of the scout. The
interview was prolonged for several hours; and at its close a
staff-officer was despatched to the corps commander; for what purpose, of
course, Somers had no intimation.

"Lieutenant Somers, you have earned your promotion; and if you don't have
it, it will be because I have not influence enough to procure it. You
have done well."

"Thank you, sir."

"Your friend, Senator Guilford, shall hear of you within forty-eight
hours."

"I beg your pardon, sir; but, grateful as I am to Senator Guilford for
the interest he has expressed in me, I don't care to be patronized by any
man in civil life."

"Whew!" laughed the general. "I wish some of our colonels and brigadiers
would take a lesson from you. Never mind, Lieutenant Somers; you will
deserve all you ever get."

"Thank you, sir."

"Go to your quarters now. Here," he added, dashing off a note at his
table, in which he desired that Somers might be excused from duty for the
next two days, to enable him to recover from the fatigues of his arduous
expedition.

I need not inform my readers how soundly our hero slept in his shelter
tent that night, nor how his slumbers were disturbed by a horrid rebel
with a bowie-knife, and a horrid feminine monstrosity which seemed to be
called Sue by her attendant demons; but he slept as a tired boy only can
sleep.

The next morning the brigade was relieved from picket duty, and the
regiment returned to its camp. Captain de Banyan had neither seen nor
heard from his young friend since his departure on the forenoon of the
preceding day. Of course he was overjoyed to see him, as well as
intensely curious to know where he had been, what he had done, and
whether he had been promoted. Somers told his adventures to the mess,
omitting such military information as was "contraband" in the camp.

"Somers, my dear fellow, you are a man after my own heart!" exclaimed the
captain, grasping his hand, and wringing it with all the enthusiasm of
his fervid nature. "Somers, my boy, did you ever hear of a man having his
double?"

"I have read of such things in old legends."

"I believe in it, Somers. You are my double! You are my second self! You
are as near like me as one pea is like another! Just before the battle of
Magenta----"

At this interesting point in the conversation, the officers of the mess
burst into an involuntary roar of laughter, ending up Magenta with a long
dash.

"Not exactly like you, Captain de Banyan," added Somers.

"You can't tell half so big a story," said Lieutenant Munroe.

"Gentlemen," interposed the captain with dignity, "you interrupted me at
the wrong moment. I was about to prove to you wherein Lieutenant Somers
was my double; and with your permission, I will proceed with my argument.
Just before the battle of Magenta, I was sent out on a scout; and I went
at the particular request of the Emperor Napoleon, who--permit me to add,
in the presence of a company which seems to be inimical to my
antecedents, if not to me--had unlimited confidence in my ability to
perform this delicate duty with skill and success. Well, gentlemen, I
passed our pickets; of course I mean the French pickets; for I was, as
you are all aware, a colonel in the French infantry at that time."

"We are all aware of it," laughed Munroe--"over the left."

"That is a slang phrase, and repulsive to the ears of a cultivated
gentleman. As I was saying, gentlemen, I passed our pickets, and soon
encountered a Russian general of division."

"Russian?"

"Austrian, I should have said; and I thank you, Somers, for the
correction. I suppose he was making the grand rounds with the officer of
the day. Be that as it may, he considered it his duty to stop me; and I
was under the disagreeable necessity of putting a bullet through his
head. He was a count, and the father of a large family; however, I could
not help it, though I was sorry to make orphans of his children. I
stepped into his uniform without the delay of a moment."

"Where was the sergeant of the guard, the officer of the day, and the
sentinels?" demanded Lieutenant Munroe.

"I beg you will not interrupt me, Lieutenant Munroe, with these ill-timed
remarks, which are merely intended to throw discredit on my character for
truth and veracity. I remarked, that I stepped into the uniform of the
defunct major-general. To abbreviate the narrative somewhat, I walked
through the Austrian lines for three hours, till I had discovered the
position of the infantry, cavalry and artillery. But the most singular
part of the affair was, that, when the long roll was beat once during
that eventful night, I placed myself at the head of the departed
general's division, and maneuvered it for an hour on the field, intending
to place it in such a position that the French could capture it.
Unfortunately, no attack was made by the Emperor's forces, and I could
not carry out my plan."

"Can you talk the Austrian lingo, captain?" asked Munroe.

"Of course I can," replied De Banyan with dignity.

"Here, Schrugenheimer, let us have a specimen of the lingo!" said the
tormentor, appealing to a German officer. "Ask him some questions in your
own language."

"Gentlemen, if my word is not sufficient, I shall not condescend to
demonstrate what I have said. You will notice the similarity between the
adventures of Lieutenant Somers and my own."

The officers of the mess all laughed heartily at the conclusion of the
comparison; for the story, like a fairy tale, was pleasant to hear, but
hard to believe. But weightier matters than these were at hand for these
gallant men; and before night the gay laugh had ceased, and they had
nerved themselves for the stern duties of the hour. Cannon had been
thundering to the right of them for three days; and in the afternoon they
had seen the smoke of burning bridges, which assured them that their
communications with White House had been cut off. At night, orders were
given to have the men ready to move, and to prepare for a hurried march.
Extra stores were destroyed, clothing thrown away, and tents were cut in
pieces, or otherwise rendered useless to the next occupants of the
ground. Everything to be transported was reduced to the smallest possible
compass.

These orders were ominous of disaster; but on the following morning a
general order was read, to the effect that all was right. The troubled
expression on the countenances of officers and men indicated their
incredulity; for the destruction in which they had been engaged belied
the words of the order. The brigade was then moved back three miles from
the camp. A portion of the regiment was posted near a house, in which was
a bedridden old woman, attended by her daughter. The rebels were
advancing by the Williamsburg road, and soon had a battery of artillery
in position to shell the vicinity of the house.

It was an intensely hot day. Captain de Banyan sat asleep on the fence
near the house. He was very much exhausted by the labors of the two
preceding nights on picket, and at the destruction of the stores; and
while Somers was watching the progress of the battle on the right, where
a sharp fight was in progress, a shell screamed between them, and struck
the house about a foot from the ground.

"That reminds me of the night before Magenta," said the veteran, opening
his eyes, without even a start. "A hundred-pounder shell knocked my hat
off, and then passed through the two open windows at each gable of a
house, without even breaking a pane of glass."

"A narrow escape for you and for the house," replied Somers with a
languid smile.


CHAPTER XVII

GLENDALE AND MALVERN HILLS


Captain de Banyan was as cool and indifferent to danger as though he had
been shot-proof. Cannon-balls and shell flew through the air; but the
veteran paid no attention to them--except that once in a while they
reminded him of Magenta, or some other of the numerous battle-fields
where he had displayed his valor. There was little fighting for our
regiment at this point, though there was a sharp action on the right of
the position.

The rebels attacked our forces with tremendous vigor at Savage's Station.
It was believed by their generals that the Union army was utterly
demoralized; that it was retreating in disorder towards the James River;
and that a vigorous onslaught would result in its capture. The first
intimation of the blunder was received at Savage's Station, where the
Confederates were decisively repulsed; yet the hope was not abandoned of
ending the war by the destruction of the Army of the Potomac. The hosts
of the rebellion were poured down the roads, where they could intercept
the loyal forces; and the full extent of their blunder was realized only
at Malvern Hills.

At noon our regiment marched through White Oak Swamp, and late in the
evening bivouacked in a field near the road. During all this time the
road was filled with troops, and with trains of army wagons on their way
to the new "base." Very early the next morning, the march was resumed. It
was an exceedingly hot day, and the troops suffered severely from the
heat. Somers was nearly exhausted when the regiment halted at noon near a
church, which the surgeons had already occupied as a hospital. But
nothing could disturb the equanimity of Captain de Banyan. If an
opportunity offered, he rested, and went to sleep amid the screaming
shells as readily as though he had been in his chamber in the "Fifth
Avenue." It was not quite so hot as it was at Magenta, nor the march
quite so severe as before Solferino, nor the shot quite so thick as at
Chapultepec. He never grumbled himself, and never permitted any one else
to do so. If Somers ventured to suggest that events were rather hard upon
him, he wondered what he would have done if he had been at Magenta,
Solferino, Balaclava, or Chapultepec.

Somers was disposed to make the best of the circumstances; and though
hungry, tired and nearly melted, he sustained himself with unfaltering
courage amid the trials of that eventful march. All day long, the tide of
army wagons and cattle flowed down the road; and the brigade remained
near the church at Glendale, waiting for them to pass. At dark the order
was given to move forward, while the roar of cannon and musketry
reverberated on the evening air, assuring the weary veterans that the
baptism of blood was at hand for them, as it had been before for their
comrades in arms.

The regiment followed a narrow road through the woods, which was thronged
with the _débris_ of the conflict, hurled back by the fierce assaults of
the rebels. The cowardly skulkers and the noncombatants of the engaged
regiments were here with their tale of disaster and ruin; and, judging
from the mournful stories they told, the once proud Army of the Potomac
had been utterly routed and discomfited. Cowards with one bar, cowards
with two bars, cowards with no bar, and cowards with the eagle on their
shoulders, repeated the wail of disaster; and the timid would have shrunk
from the fiery ordeal before them, if the intrepid officers and the mass
of the rank and file had not been above the influence of the poltroons'
trembling tones and quaking limbs.

"Forward, my brave boys! I've been waiting all my lifetime for such a
scene as this!" shouted Captain de Banyan, as he flourished his sword
after the most approved style.

"Don't mind the cowards!" said Somers, as the stragglers poured out their
howls of terror.

There was little need of these stirring exhortations; for the men were as
eager for the fight as the officers, and laughed with genuine glee at the
pitiful aspect of the runaways. They advanced in line of battle to the
support of the hard-pressed troops in front of them, and poured a
withering fire into the enemy. With that fiendish yell which the Southern
soldiers invariably use in the hour of battle, they rushed forward with a
fury which was madness, and into which no fear of death entered.

"They are coming!" shouted Somers, as the legions of rebellion surged
down upon the line, yelling like so many demons, as though they expected
the veterans to be vanquished by mere noise. "Stand steady, my men!"

"That reminds me of the Russian advance at Magenta," said Captain de
Banyan, who happened to pass near the spot where Somers stood.

"The Austrians, you mean," replied Somers, trying to keep as cool and
unmoved as his companion.

"Excuse me; I meant the Austrians," replied the captain. "The fact
is----Forward, my brave fellows!" roared he as the order came down the
line.

The enemy had been temporarily checked, and the brigade advanced to
pursue the advantage gained. They poured another terrible volley into the
rebels; when a regiment of the latter, infuriated by whiskey and the
fierce goadings of their officers, rushed down with irresistible force
upon a portion of the Union line, and succeeded in making a partial break
in our regiment. The only remaining line officer in one of the companies
where the rupture occurred was wounded at this critical moment, and borne
under the feet of the excited combatants.

"Lieutenant Somers, take command of that company!" shouted the colonel,
as he dashed towards the imperiled portion of the line.

Somers made haste to obey the order when the line was giving way before
the impetuous charge. He felt that the safety of the whole army depended
upon himself at that momentous instant, and that on the salvation of the
army rested the destiny of his country. What was the life of a single
man, of a hundred thousand even, compared with the fearful issue of that
moment? It was the feeling of the young soldier, and he was ready to lay
down his life for the flag which symbolized the true glory of the nation.

"Rally round me!" he cried, as he discharged his revolver into the breast
of a brave captain who was urging his company forward with the most
unflinching resolution. "Down with them!" he shouted, as he waved his
sword above his head.

"Hurrah!" roared a brave sergeant near him, and the cry was taken up by
the gallant fellows who had been pressed back by sheer force of numbers.

"Forward!" shouted Somers, as he dashed down a bayonet, which would have
transfixed him on the spot if he had not been on the alert.

The men rallied, and stood boldly up to the work before them. They were
inspired by the example of the young lieutenant; and the rebel regiment
slowly and doggedly retired, leaving many of their number dead or wounded
on the field, and a small number as prisoners in the hands of Somers's
new command.

After alternate repulses and successes, the rebels were signally defeated
and driven back. It was a sharp and decisive struggle; but again had the
army been saved from destruction, and the long line of army wagons still
pursued its way in safety towards the waters of the James.

Again had the rebel general's brilliant calculation failed. His troops,
maddened by the fires of the whiskey demon, had done all that men or
fiends could do; but the trained valor of the Army of the Potomac had
again saved the country. Onward it marched towards the goal of safety
under the sheltering wings of the gunboat fleet in the river.

All night long the men marched, with frequent intervals of rest, as the
movements of the army trains required them. There was no sleep, even
after that hard-fought battle; no real rest from the exciting and wearing
events of the day. There was little or no food to be had; and the
fainting soldiers, though still ready to fight and march in their
weakness, longed for the repose of a few hours in camp. But not yet was
the boon to be granted. On the following morning, our regiment arrived at
Malvern Hills, where they were again formed in line of battle, in
readiness to receive the menacing hosts of the rebels.

"We are all right now, Somers," said Captain de Banyan while they were
waiting for the onset.

"Not quite yet, captain. Don't you see those signal-flags on the houses
yonder?"

"They mean something, of course. I did not intend to say there will be no
fighting; only, that we have a good position, and all the rebels in the
Confederacy can't start us now."

"Those flags indicate that the rebels are moving."

"Let them come; the sooner the better, and the sooner it will be over.
Hurrah!" exclaimed the captain, as the inspiring strains of the band in
the rear saluted his ears.

Cheer after cheer passed along the extended lines as the notes of the
"Star-spangled Banner" thrilled the hearts of the weary, fainting
soldiers. The bands had not been heard during the operations in front of
Richmond; and their music, as Sergeant Hapgood expressed it, "sounded
like home."

"That does me good, Somers," continued the captain. "There's nothing like
music for the nerves. It wakes men up, and makes them forget all their
troubles. Forward, the light brigade!" he added, flourishing his sword in
the air. "I suppose you know that poem, Somers?"

"Of course; I know it by heart; read it in school the last day I ever
went."

"Did you, indeed?"

"Nothing very singular about that, is there?"

"Rather a remarkable coincidence, I should say," replied the captain with
easy indifference, as he twirled his sword on the ground.

"I don't see it."

"You read the poem at school, and I was in that charge."

"You?"

"Yes, my boy. I was a captain in that brigade. But what called the
circumstance to my mind was the music which struck up just now. I had a
bugler in my company who played 'Hail, Columbia' during the whole of the
fight."

"'Hail, Columbia?'" demanded Somers.

"Certainly; the fellow had a fancy for that tune; and though it wasn't
exactly a national thing to the British army, he always played it when he
got a chance. Well, sir, I think that bugler did more than any other man
in the charge of the light brigade. He never lost a note, and it fired
the men up to the pitch of frenzy."

"He was a brave fellow," replied Somers languidly; for he was too
thoroughly worn out to appreciate the stories of his veteran companion.

"He was the most determined man I ever met in my life. He was killed in
the charge, poor fellow; but he had filled his bugle so full of wind,
that the music did not cease till full five minutes after he was
stone-dead."

"Come, come, captain! that's a little too bad," said Somers seriously.

"Too bad? Well, I should not be willing to take oath that the time was
just five minutes after the bugler died. I did not take out my watch, and
time it; and, of course, I can only give you my judgment as to the
precise number of minutes."

"You are worse than Baron Munchausen, who told a story something like
that; only his was the more reasonable of the two."

"Somers, my boy! you have got a villainously bad habit of discrediting
the statements of a brother-officer and a gentleman," said Captain de
Banyan seriously.

"And you have got a bad habit of telling the most abominable stories that
ever proceeded from the mouth of any man."

"We'll drop the subject, Somers; for such discussions lead to unpleasant
results. Do you see that rebel battery?" added the captain, pointing to a
road a mile off, where the enemy had taken position to shell the Union
line.

"I see it."

The rebel battery opened fire, which was vigorously answered by the other
side. The scene began to increase in interest as the cannonade extended
along the whole line; and, through the entire day, there raged the most
furious artillery conflict of the war. The rebel masses were hurled time
after time against the Union line; but it maintained its position like a
wall of iron, while thousands of the enemy were recklessly sacrificed in
the useless assault. General M---- had probably drunk more than his usual
quantity of whiskey; and, though he was as brave as a lion, hundreds of
his men paid the penalty with their lives of his rashness and
indiscretion.

Night came again upon a victorious field, while hundreds of weeping
mothers in the neighboring city sighed for the sons who would return no
more to their arms; and while mothers wept, fathers groaned and sisters
moaned, the grand army of the Confederacy had been beaten, and the proud
rulers of an infatuated people were trembling for their own safety in the
presence of the ruin with which defeat threatened them.

After the battle commenced the movement of the Army of the Potomac down
the river to Harrison's Landing. The rain fell in torrents, and the
single road was crowded with troops and wagons. Though the exhausted
soldiers slept, even while the guns of the enemy roared in front of them,
and during the brief halts which the confusion in the road caused, there
was no real repose. The excitement of the battle and the retreat, and the
undefinable sense of insecurity which their situation engendered,
banished rest. Tired Nature asserted her claims, and the men yielded to
them only when endurance had reached its utmost limit.

At Harrison's Landing, the work of intrenching the position was
immediately commenced; and it was some days before the army were entirely
assured that defeat and capture were not still possible. The failure of
the campaign was not without its effect upon the troops. They felt, that,
instead of marching under their victorious banners into the enemy's
capital, they had been driven from their position. It was not disaster,
but it was failure. Though the soldiers were still in good condition, and
as ready as ever to breast the storm of battle, they were in a measure
dispirited by the misfortune.

General McClellan and General Lee had each failed to accomplish his
purpose. It was the intention of the latter to send Stonewall Jackson
into the rear of the Union army, cut it off from its base of supplies,
and then attack in front and on the left. The plan was defeated by
General McClellan's change of base, which was forced upon him by the
cutting-off of his communications with the Pamunkey River. The Union
generals, who were first attacked on the right, supposed they were
confronted by Jackson, who had come down to flank them in this direction;
while Lee intended that he should attack farther down the Peninsula. Each
commanding general, to some extent, mistook the purpose of the other.
Whatever errors were made by the grand players in this mighty game, about
one thing there can be no mistake--that the courage and fortitude of the
rank and file saved the Army of the Potomac, and pushed aside the mighty
disaster in which its ruin would have involved the country. All honor to
the unnamed heroes who fought those great battles, and endured hardships
which shall thrill the souls of Americans for ages to come!


CHAPTER XVIII

LIEUTENANT SOMERS HAS A NEW SENSATION


The experience of the soldiers at Harrison's Landing, for a month
following their arrival, was not of the most agreeable nature; and
consisted of too large a proportion of exercise with pick and shovel to
be very pleasant to those who had not been accustomed to handling these
useful implements. Intrenchments and batteries were constructed; and the
position was as carefully fortified as the genius of the distinguished
engineer in command could suggest, and as thoroughly as though he
expected to spent the balance of the term of his natural life at this
place.

The army was soon in a condition to defy the operations of the enemy, who
were wise enough not to molest it. Somers, in common with the rest of the
command, recovered from the severe trials of the movement from White Oak
Swamp, and again longed for active operations. About two weeks after the
cessation of active operations, the official documents which announced
his promotion to the rank of first lieutenant came down to the army; but
this was a foregone conclusion. He had won his first bar by his scouting
services, and his commission was expected for a fortnight before its
arrival. It did not, therefore, cause him any surprise; and was so small
an elevation, that his comrades hardly congratulated him upon its
reception.

A fortnight later, there came a startling sensation to thrill him with
satisfaction and delight. An orderly from the division headquarters
summoned him to attend upon the general. The message startled him; for it
indicated some momentous event to him, and he hastily prepared to obey
the order.

"You are in luck again," said De Banyan, grasping his hand.

"Perhaps not," replied Somers, bewildered at the suggestion.

"I know you are, my dear boy. I was sent for just four weeks after the
battle of Solferino, and made a brigadier-general," persisted the
captain.

"Ah! then you are General de Banyan?"

"No, no; I dropped the title when I ceased to hold the office."

"That was modest, general."

"Captain, if you please."

"You are entitled by courtesy to the use of the title, and you shall not
be robbed of any of your honors."

"As a particular favor, Somers, never call me general. I do not wish to
rise above my actual rank. I have never mentioned the little circumstance
of my promotion before. Your good fortune was so similar to my own, that
I was surprised into doing so."

"What do you mean by my good fortune, captain?"

"Why, you are promoted again. I will bet my year's pay you have had
another lift."

"Nonsense! I have just been promoted."

"Bah! what was that to a man of your merit, with a Senator to speak at
court for you? A petty first lieutenancy is nothing for a brilliant
fellow like you."

"I am not half so brilliant a fellow as you declare, and I think that a
commission as first lieutenant is a big thing for a young man like me.
I'm sure I never had an idea of being an officer at all; and, when I was
made a sergeant, I didn't think I deserved it."

"What do you suppose a major-general can want with you? You have heard
from Senator Guilford once before, and I am satisfied you will hear from
him again. Now, Somers, what do you suppose the general wants of you?"

"I don't know; I think it very likely he wants a man of my size to go up
the river, or on the other side, scouting; nothing more than that, I am
satisfied. But I must obey the order," added Somers, who had been making
his preparations during the conversation.

"Well, good-by, my boy; and I shall have to stand one side for you after
this, and salute you as major."

"As what?"

"Major."

"How absurd you are, captain! You always talk like a sensible fellow;
that is, when you mean what you say."

"A hard hit; and very likely the first thing you do, when you get to be a
major, will be to arrest me for lying."

"Your hit is the hardest, my dear captain. We have seen some hard times
together; and you may be sure that whatever I am, I shall never forget
you."

"That's hearty, my boy! Your hand once more," replied De Banyan,
extending his own. "After the battle of Solferino----"

"Really, captain, you must excuse me this time, or the general will put
me under arrest for my want of promptness, instead of sending me on
special duty."

"Well, good luck to you, Somers," said the captain as the lieutenant
started for the division headquarters.

As he passed out of sight, an expression of sadness settled down upon
Captain de Banyan's face. He looked disappointed and uncomfortable, and
it is quite probable that he envied the good fortune of his young
companion in arms. If Somers had been brave, and attentive to his duty,
he had been no less so himself; and he could not help feeling that the
destruction of those railroad cars had made the young man's fortune; that
his rapid advancement was a mere stroke of good luck.

Lieutenant Somers, wondering what could possibly be wanted of him,
hastened to the headquarters of the division. He had no faith whatever in
the prognostications of Captain de Banyan, and was too modest to believe
that he had done anything to merit another promotion so soon. Recalling
the incidents of his career since his eventful expedition within the
rebel lines, there was nothing in his conduct to merit even the notice of
his superiors, unless it was what others called his skill and courage in
rallying the broken company at Glendale. He had been warmly praised for
this act; but he deemed it of little importance, for the memory of
Williamsburg cast into the shade anything that had occurred to him since
that bloody day.

He was ushered into the presence of the general, who gave him the kindly
welcome which he always bestowed upon those of humble rank. Now, Somers
cherished an intense admiration for this distinguished officer, and
esteemed it a greater honor to stand in his presence than in that of the
most powerful sovereign of the earth.

"Lieutenant Somers?" said the general, extending his hand; a piece of
condescension which made our officer blush, and appear as awkward as a
country school-boy.

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir," stammered Somers, as he took the proffered
hand.

"You behaved well at Glendale, Somers," said the general bluntly.

"I endeavored to do my duty, general."

"You did well on that scout, too; and I'm going to send you out on
another, if you have any fancy for such work."

"I will do the best I can."

"But, my brave fellow, I wish you to be very careful; for we can't afford
to lose officers like you."

"I am always careful, general," said Somers with a smile.

"Can you handle a boat?"

"Yes, sir; I was brought up among boats."

"You will go over the river. There is rebel cavalry over there, and very
likely a considerable force of infantry. I am inclined to think they are
building batteries in the woods, to close up the navigation of the river,
or perhaps to shell us out of our position. In a word, I am instructed to
solve the problem, and I have selected you to do the work. What do you
say?"

"I am all ready, sir, to undertake that, or any service to which I may be
ordered."

"That's the right spirit, Captain Somers; and I thank you for the
promptness with which you enter into my plans. I am satisfied, captain,
that you will discharge the duty to my entire satisfaction."

"Thank you, sir."

"Well, Captain Somers, you shall take what force you think necessary. As
it will not be prudent for you to go over before dark, you may make up
your plan, and I will listen to the details before you go. How many boats
shall you want, captain?"

"Only one, sir," replied Somers promptly; though he was wondering with
all his might how the general happened to make so many blunders in regard
to his military title, for he had called him captain four or five times.

"Only one? You will need force enough to protect you, captain," replied
the general.

Captain again!

"I do not intend to fight the whole rebel army, if it is over there. I do
not propose to take more than half a dozen men with me."

"I think that is a sensible view of the enterprise; for the more men you
take, the greater your chances of being discovered. Select your own men,
Captain Somers."

Captain Somers! The general had certainly forgotten that he was only a
first lieutenant, or else he was amusing himself at his modest
subordinate's expense.

"I know of several men in our regiment who are just what I want," replied
Somers, hardly able to speak from embarrassment, on account of the
general's often-repeated mistake.

"Very well; you shall have the necessary authority to select whom you
please. You may go now, and arrange your plans."

Somers saluted the general, and was about to retire, when the thought
occurred to him that he might at least gratify his friend Captain de
Banyan, and perhaps bring him favorably to the general's notice.

"May I be allowed to select an officer to go with me?" he asked.

"Certainly, if you desire; but you will remember that you are a young
officer, going out on difficult and dangerous service, and that officers
will not be so obedient as privates," suggested the general. "Whom do you
desire to go with you?"

"Captain de Banyan, of our regiment."

"Captain! Why, then he will be your equal in rank, and by priority of
commission, your superior."

"We shall agree remarkably well, general, though he is my superior in
rank, without regard to dates," replied Somers, who by this time had come
to the conclusion that the general meant something by calling him
captain.

"No; you are both captains," added the general with apparent
indifference.

"I beg your pardon, general; you have probably forgotten that the
commission which was forwarded to me only about two weeks ago was that of
first lieutenant."

"I remember all about it, Captain Somers; but, by the time you reach your
quarters, there will be another commission there for you. By the way,
captain, do you remember Senator Guilford?"

"I do, general; I have good reason to remember him; for he takes a deep
interest in my affairs," replied Somers, whose brown face was red with
blushes.

"Has a pretty daughter, hasn't he? Fell out of a railroad car and broke
her arm, didn't she?"

"That was the only time I ever saw her, general," stammered Somers; "and
probably I shall never see her again."

"Why, you are as cold-blooded as a frog! Why don't you write to the
damsel, and tell her you are still alive, if you can't think of anything
else to say?"

"I don't like to curry favor with great folks."

"I like that, captain. But you must attend to your duty now. You may have
Captain de--what's-his-name--if you like."

"Captain de Banyan, sir. He is a brave and noble fellow."

"Your friend, eh?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, I remember him. He is certainly a brave fellow; for I noticed him
at Glendale."

"At Oak Grove he captured the enemy's sharpshooters, who were lodged in
the old house."

"I thought you did that."

"No, sir; I was under Captain de Banyan's orders at the time."

"I see; and I will remember that, Captain Somers. By the way, it would be
well for you to write to Senator Guilford, just to inform him of your
promotion. He has done good service for you, though I have no hesitation
in saying your promotion would have been certain without his aid."

"Thank you, general," replied Somers, who fully understood the meaning of
that significant remark.

We regret that the good conduct of our hero has destroyed the fitness of
the title which we had chosen for our humble volume; but we will venture
to say that our sympathizing readers will rejoice with him in his
advancement.

Captain Somers! The idea seemed to him as big as a mountain, when he
withdrew from the presence of the general, who evidently experienced a
deep satisfaction in the result of his recommendation to the authorities,
and had humorously chosen this method of communicating the welcome news.
The earth seemed to be as elastic as India-rubber under the feet of the
new-made captain, as he hastened back to the camp of the regiment.

He could hardly believe his senses; it was so strange that a young man
like him should attain to this high rank. He wanted to "crow;" and
perhaps he would have done so, if he had not considered that he must
maintain the dignity of his new office.

"Captain Somers, I greet you!" exclaimed De Banyan on his return to camp.

"Who told you I was a captain?" laughed Somers.

"This document," replied he, handing him the ponderous official envelope.
"I congratulate you, my boy; though I'm rather disappointed to find you
are not a major."

"Nonsense, captain! I would have declined a major's commission."

"Declined it!" gasped De Banyan. "Well, I don't know but you would. You
are the only officer I ever knew to decline a glass of wine, and I don't
know but you would decline a major's commission."

"I certainly would. Why, I'm only a boy; and I don't know but I ought to
decline even a captain's commission. I'm only eighteen years old."

"What of that? There's the Fourth Vermont over there--the colonel of that
regiment isn't twenty-one yet, and there isn't a better or braver officer
in the army. If you decline, I'll cross you off from my list of friends.
Why, at Balaclava, when I was----"

"Balaclava and blarney!" exclaimed Somers impatiently.

"I was only going to say, that I was but seventeen when I was made a
captain in the British army."

"I have been a brigadier in my own imagination, just as you were a
captain, when you were seventeen. But never mind that; I am going on a
scout; have got my orders."

"Ah, my boy! you are going to celebrate the arrival of your commission by
active duty. I wish the generals would think of me when they want
something handsome done."

"What do you say to going with me?"

"I would thank my stars for the chance."

"Well, then I have orders for you."

"Somers, my dear fellow, you touch my heart-strings!" cried the captain,
jumping up, and throwing his arms around Somers in the most extravagant
manner.

"On one condition," added Captain Somers.

"Any condition you please."

"You are my superior; but----"

"I know all about it. I will go as a volunteer, and you shall command the
expedition."

"We will work together."

"With all my heart."

Somers then selected six men for the service, with special reference to
their skill as boatmen, and ordered them to make the necessary
preparations for duty. As there were still several hours to spare before
dark, he used a portion of this time in writing a letter to his mother,
informing her of the remarkable fortune that had attended him; and
another to Senator Guilford, thanking him for the kind interest he had
manifested in his welfare, in the postscript of which he wrote the
history of Captain de Banyan's valuable services, and modestly added that
any favor conferred on his friend would ever be gratefully remembered by
the writer.


CHAPTER XIX

OVER THE RIVER


Captain Somers, as we are hereafter to call him, was proud and happy in
the distinction which had been bestowed upon him; but he had some doubts
whether he had fully earned his promotion. He had done as much as any,
and more than some. Yet it seemed to him just as though nothing short of
the capture or annihilation of a whole brigade of the enemy's forces
could entitle him to such a distinguished honor, especially as he was
only eighteen years of age. He was afraid that Senator Guilford had
exerted too much influence in his favor; but the general of the division
had assured him he had won his promotion, and would have received it in
time, even without the powerful aid of the honorable gentleman at
Washington.

Infantry Regiment A. His twin brother August, my godfather, followed his
example in so far as this was the 40th in Mainz garnisonierende Infantry
Regiment (8th Rheinisches Füsilierregiment) transgressed. Prussian
NCO A family of that time lived in wretched conditions. The salary was
more than just how we at that time ever in the military and official world
of Prussia Narrow Hans chef, and pretty much every man for God, King
and the Fatherland Schmachtriemen dress and had to go hungry. My mother
received permission to lead a kind of canteen to be, which means they had
the right to demand all sorts of small items to the teams in the
casemates to sell, what happened to the single desk, we had inne.

So I see it today in the spirit before me, as in the evening with a lamp
Rape fed the soldiers the stone bowls with steaming potatoes filled à
Pfennigs Prussian portion 6. For us children - I was in April 1841, the
first brother and In summer 1842 the second was born - was life in the
casemates a life full of delights. We drove ourselves into the
Kasemattenstuben around, petted or gehänselt of officers and crews. Goods
but the rooms empty, because the teams were ausgerückt exercises, so I
went on and got the same guitar the NCO winter man who is also my godfather
was from the wall on which I have so long musical exercises operation
until no string was longer.

To these exercises unbridled music and its evil consequences of
a distraction to give, he carved me a board from a guitar-like instrument,
which he covered with gut strings. I sat with this now in the company of
my brother for hours on the door to a courtyard in the main street and
maltreated Deutzer the strings, which the two daughters from a resident
Dragonerrittmeisters so "raptured" to us more often for my musical
achievements with cake or candy regalierten .

Of course, suffered from this musical is not the military exercises. The
incentive was indeed in the whole neighborhood, he was literally in
the air. As soon as I am the first trousers and the first rock anhatte,
which obviously has both an old military cloak of the father's timbers
had been, I am equipped with the necessary arms, beside or behind the
free space in front of the casemate exercising teams and fact
annoyed their movements.

As my mother later told often humorous, should I include the right and
left move up most certainly ready to receive an exercise, the teams
and caused a lot of sweat in them, I sometimes by the commanding
officer or NCO as a model has been made out to be.

In my father's eyes but gradually saw the Kommißleben differently to how
his son.

He was, as my mother often told his brother like a very conscientious,
punctual and neat military - a pattern known as a soldier - but
he had already at that time, his twelve or more years of military
time on the back, and stood him the soldiers life, finally, how to
say, up to the neck.

The service was probably even petty hidebound and operate than today. The
Gamaschendienst celebrated at that time, his orgies.

"And you can tell a tougher story now than you could then, I'll warrant."

"There it is again!"

"Now, my dear fellow, I'm afraid you will die with an enormous fib in
your mouth."

"Come, Somers, you are taking a mean advantage of my friendship. You know
that I like you too well to quarrel with you."

"Silence!" said Somers earnestly. "There is a boat coming out from the
rebel side of the river."

The water was covered with vessels of every description in the vicinity
of Harrison's Landing; and the boat had just emerged from this forest of
masts and smokestacks. It was time to be entirely silent again; for the
rebels were on the alert in every direction, watching to strike a blow at
the grand army, or to pick up individual stragglers who might fall in
their way. The boat which Somers had discovered was approaching from the
rebel side of the river; and to be seen by the enemy, at this point of
the proceedings, would be fatal to the expedition.

"Who goes there?" said a man in the rebel boat.

"Friends!" replied Somers.

"Who are ye?"

The tones were so unmistakably Southern, that there could be no question
in regard to the party to which the boat belonged.

"Officers examining the enemy's lines," replied Somers.

At the same time he ordered his crew to pull, and steered the boat so as
to run her alongside the other. On the way, he whispered to the men his
instructions; and, as soon as they were near enough, they leaped on board
the rebel boat, and captured her astonished crew before they had time to
make any resistance. No doubt they thought this was very rude treatment
to receive from the hands of those who professed to be their friends; but
they had discovered their mistake by this time, and it afforded a
sufficient explanation of the seeming inconsistency.

The capture of this boat involved the necessity of returning to the
nearest steamer in the river to dispose of the prisoners. On the way
back, Somers and De Banyan conversed with the rebels on general topics;
for the latter refused to say anything which could be of service to their
enemy. After the captives had been delivered on board the steamer, our
party decided to take the boat which had been captured, instead of the
one they had brought from the landing; for there were some peculiarities
in its construction, which made it a safer conveyance in rebel waters
than the other, the approach of which would excite suspicion if seen.

Again they pulled down the river, and passed the point from beyond which
the rebel boat had approached them. The shore was probably lined with
pickets; and the wisdom of exchanging the boats was now more apparent to
them than before. Somers steered into a little inlet or bay beyond the
point, and at the head of it found a creek flowing into the river. It was
wide and deep at the outlet; and he decided to ascend it.

"How was it, Andy?" said a voice from the shore, after the boat had
advanced a few rods up the creek.

"All right!" replied Somers at a venture; though he was somewhat startled
by the question.

"Have the Yankees any picket boats out?" demanded the man on shore.

"Haven't seen any."

"How far up have you been?"

"About two miles," answered Somers, continually coughing to account for
any change in his voice which might be apparent to his friend on shore.

"The fire-steamer is all ready," added the voice; "and it is about time
to go to work."

"The fire-steamer!" exclaimed Somers in a low tone.

"They are going to burn the vessels in the river," added De Banyan.

"What shall we do?"

"We must stop their fun at all hazards," replied the valiant captain
promptly.

"What are you stopping there for, Andy? Why don't you pull up the creek?"
continued the man on shore.

"My name isn't Andy," said Somers; "and I don't fully understand this
business."

"Who are you, then?" replied the rebel. "What has become of Andy?"

"He has got another job, and sent me to do this one," answered Somers,
whose ready wit had adopted a plan to defeat the purpose of the enemy.

"Who are you?"

"Tom Leathers. Andy sent me up to attend to this matter. Where is the
fire-steamer?"

"About half a mile farther up the creek. But where is Andy?"

"Some general sent for him; and he has gone to Richmond. I reckon the
iron-clad's coming down soon."

"Can you take care of the steamer?"

"Certainly I can."

"Are you a pilot?"

"Pilot enough for this business."

"I understand it all. Andy was afraid to do this job, and has backed
out."

"I only know what he said to me," replied Somers innocently.

"Well, pull up the creek, and don't waste any more time in talking about
it."

"I haven't wasted any time. You have done all the talking yourself,"
replied Somers, who thought he should not be a consistent Southerner if
he did not growl.

Somers directed the men to pull again, and the boat advanced up the creek
till the steamer appeared. She was a small, worn-out old craft, which had
probably dodged into the creek when the Union fleet came up the river.
The man who had spoken from the shore reached the place almost as soon as
the boat. He was dressed in the gray of the Confederate army, and was
evidently an officer detailed to perform the duty of fitting out the
fire-ship.

"This is a most remarkable proceeding on the part of the pilot," said the
officer.

"I can't help it. You needn't growl at me about it. If you don't want me,
I don't want the job," replied Somers sourly.

"Don't be impudent to me," added the officer.

"And don't you be impudent to me," said Somers. "I'm not one of your
men."

"Silence! or I shall put you under arrest."

"No, you won't."

"Do you know the channel of the river?"

"Of course I do. What do you suppose Andy sent me here for?" snarled
Somers.

"Keep a civil tongue in your head, man."

"You had better show me how to do it first. Come, Graves," he added,
turning to De Banyan, "we are not wanted here, and we will go home
again."

"Who is that man with you?"

"Graves."

"Where did you get all these men?"

"They came with me to see the fun, and help the thing along."

The officer stepped on board of the steamer, and Somers and De Banyan
joined him on the deck.

"I think I've seen you somewhere."

"I think very likely; I was there once."

"You are a crusty young cub; but it may be you know your duty."

"Of course I do; and as for being crusty, I treated you like a gentleman
till you began to snarl at me."

"Well, well, my friend, we will rub out the past and begin again," said
the officer pleasantly.

"With all my heart, if you say so," replied Somers with equal suavity.

"This is a very important enterprise, and we want to teach the Yankees
that it will be better for them to stay at home next time they want to
come down South. What is your name?"

"Tom Leathers. What's yours? Andy told me; but I've forgotten."

"Captain Osborn."

The rebel officer proceeded to give the supposed pilot very full
instructions in regard to the steamer, which was to be run up the river
to City Point, set on fire, and then abandoned to float with the current
through the thickest of the Federal fleet, blowing up gunboats, and
consuming transports by the hundred. The fire-steamer had been loaded
with pitch-wood, tar, pitch and turpentine; and Captain Osborn was
satisfied that the plan, if thoroughly carried out, would cause
tremendous havoc among the Yankee vessels. He rubbed his hands with
delight as he contemplated the prospect of driving the "Hessian" fleet
from the river, and starving the Union army out of its position.

An engineer and two firemen, whom they found on board the steamer, were
all the crew she had, and all she needed besides the pilot. They had got
up steam, and the vessel was all ready to move on her errand of
destruction when the word should be given.

"Now you are all ready," said Captain Osborn when he had completed his
instructions. "You will hoist the American flag, and pretend you are a
Yankee, if they attempt to stop you on your way up the river."

"I can do that to a charm," replied Somers. "I am all ready. Where is
Graves? Hallo, Graves!" he shouted, when he found that his companion had
left his side to take a look at the other parts of the steamer.

"Here I am, Tom," answered Graves, emerging from the engine-room, where
he had been talking with the presiding genius of that department.

"Run up the colors."

"Ay, ay, sir!" replied De Banyan.

The colors went up, and other preparations were made for the great
enterprise.

"Cast off that stern line!" said Somers. "Make fast your painter on the
port quarter," he added to the man in the boat; and no doubt by this time
Captain Osborn was fully satisfied that he was perfectly familiar with
the management of a steamer.

Now, Somers was very well satisfied that he should run the steamer
aground before he rounded the first point in the river, and he had wisely
concluded not to undertake so rash an enterprise. Besides, he did not
come over there to be the skipper of a steamer; he had other and even
more important duties to perform. He was much more interested in certain
rebel batteries which were believed to be in process of construction
farther up the river. But Captain Osborn was an unreasonable man, and
demanded the execution of his plan. He was determined to see a
conflagration, and Somers was equally determined to gratify him.

Our pilot discovered the value of his limited nautical experience in
Pinchbrook Harbor; for it enabled him to convince the rebel officer that
he was a full-fledged "salt," and was entirely at home on the deck of any
vessel that could float in the waters of the James. The stern-line and
the bow-line were cast off; and Somers stood in the little wheel-house,
ready to ring the bells. Captain Osborn had just stepped on shore,
intending to mount his horse and ride up the river, where he could see
the conflagration when it came off.

Just then, there was a tremendous commotion among the firemen and
engineer; and, a moment later, a broad, bright sheet of flame rose from
the heap of combustibles in the after-part of the steamer.


CHAPTER XX

CAPTAIN DE BANYAN FINDS AN OLD FRIEND


Both Somers and De Banyan flew to the rescue, and made a most
enthusiastic attempt to check the fire; but the raging element was now
past control. The flames spread through the combustible material which
had been stored on the deck; and they were compelled to abandon the
ill-starred steamer with the utmost precipitation, in order to save their
own lives.

De Banyan had rolled up an old newspaper, making of it a kind of torch,
some three feet in length, which he had inserted in a mass of pitch-wood
shavings, and set the end on fire. It had burned long enough to remove
suspicion from him; and, when the pilot and crew went on shore, Captain
Osborn had no idea of the trick of which he had been made the victim. Our
scouts kept up appearances in the most remarkable manner, and Somers was
only afraid that his zealous companion would overdo the matter.

"What do you mean by that, Captain Osborn?" demanded Somers, as he shook
the cinders from his clothes in the presence of the rebel officer. "Did
you intend to sacrifice our lives?"

"Yes; burn us up before we had time to leave the old hulk!" added De
Banyan furiously. "I thought we were to light the fire ourselves."

"I didn't do it," replied Captain Osborn.

"You didn't? Who did do it, then?" persisted Somers.

"I don't know."

"Well, I don't know; but, in my opinion, you did it yourself."

"You are an idiot! Do you think I would destroy the work of my own
hands?" added the rebel warmly.

"Well, I supposed you fired the train so as to be sure the thing was done
right."

"You are a fool, or else you didn't suppose any such thing."

"I didn't know but what you had one of those clock machines, that touch a
thing off at a certain time. Well, how did it happen, then?"

"I don't know; perhaps from a spark from the fire. No matter how it was
done now. It is done, and can't be helped. I have lost the satisfaction
of seeing half the Yankee fleet burnt up. I would rather have given a
year's pay than have had this accident happen."

"Haven't they got most ready for the Yankee fleet above here?" asked
Somers as carelessly as he could.

"What do you mean?"

"They are building batteries up above, to knock the Yankees into pieces,
aren't they?"

"Perhaps they are."

"Well, Captain Osborn, I don't believe your plan would have succeeded if
the steamer hadn't caught afire."

"Don't you? Why not?"

"Suppose the Yankees had stopped us on our way up, and come on board the
steamer. Don't you think they would have known what she was for?"

"Perhaps they would."

"Of course they would. Why didn't you fit out your steamer up the river?"

"We haven't so many steamers that we can afford to burn them up. We took
this one because she happened to be in the creek, where the Yankees could
capture her at any time they pleased."

"It wouldn't need a steamer above the fleet; a raft would do just as
well. I think I shall go up the river, and see what can be done. Well,
boys," added Somers to the men in the boat, "there will be no fun
to-night, and you may as well go home."

As this order was in conformity with previous instructions, the men
pulled down the creek to its mouth, where they could remain concealed
till their officers returned.

By the light of the burning steamer, Captain Osborn had attentively
scanned the features of the pilot and his companion, apparently for the
purpose of determining where he had seen the former. As they had both
dressed themselves for the occasion, they submitted to his scrutiny
without fear. When he had finished his survey, he mounted his horse,
which was fastened to a tree near the creek, and had become very restive
as the glaring fire scattered burning cinders near him. As the rider had
no further use for our enterprising operatives, he bestowed no further
notice upon them, and rode off to report to his commanding officer the
failure of the hopeful enterprise.

"Well, we have done some good by coming over here," said Captain de
Banyan as the officer galloped up the road above the creek.

"Hush, captain!" replied Somers. "You forget where you are."

"No, I don't; we are alone."

"Perhaps not; the trees have ears sometimes."

"Well, where are you going now?"

"Up the river. We will take a walk up to the batteries, if there are any
there."

They proceeded in the direction indicated for about three miles without
being molested, or even challenged by a sentinel. The Army of the Potomac
had been on the other side of the river nearly a month, and had ceased to
be a curiosity to the rebel inhabitants in the vicinity; and like
sensible people, as they were in this respect if in no other, they
devoted the hours of darkness to sleep. On the shore opposite the camp,
they found a battery of artillery. Rude field-works had been constructed
near the water, on which the guns of the company had been placed. Our
travelers were too modest to make the acquaintance of the rebels, and
kept at a respectful distance from them, crawling on the ground near
enough to ascertain the force of the enemy.

Taking to the fields for greater safety, the scouts went up the river
several miles farther, without making any discoveries worthy of notice.
The object of the excursion had been fully accomplished; and they began
to retrace their steps towards the creek, where the boat was waiting
their return. When we are well employed, time passes away very rapidly;
and our adventurers had taken no note of its passage. Before they had
made a single mile, the bright streaks of day in the east warned them
that they had remained too long for their own safety.

The prospect of being examined by rebel officers in broad daylight was
not pleasant; and, increasing their speed, they walked by the shortest
way towards the creek. When they had passed the battery of artillery,
they abandoned the fields, through which they could make but slow
progress, for the road. They had three miles farther to go, and it was
now nearly sunrise.

"I think we must have lost two or three hours," said Somers as they
hastened on their way. "I had no idea that it was more than two o'clock
in the morning when we turned about."

"Nor I," replied De Banyan. "We must have spent two or three hours in
crawling on the ground about that battery."

"I don't see where the time is all gone."

"It goes fast when we are busy. When I was in the Crimea----"

"Never mind the Crimea now," protested Somers, who was in no mood for his
companion's fibs.

"Don't be crusty, Somers."

"I did not mean to be crusty; but you know my opinion about those stories
of the Crimea and the Italian war, and I don't think it is a good plan to
talk so much over here."

"As you please; it is your turn to speak next."

"I meant no offense."

"I know you didn't, Somers; but you reproved me, and I can only hold my
peace; for you are the commander of this expedition."

"You know I like you as a brother; but I don't like those silly yarns
about your impossible achievements. Hark! What's that?"

This last remark was caused by the sound of horses' feet behind them; and
our travelers looked back with eager interest to ascertain what was
approaching. It was a body of cavalry, which had just swept round a bend
of the road, and was now in plain sight of them.

"That won't do," said De Banyan with energy. "We must conceal ourselves."

"I think they have seen us, and we may as well make the best of it. If we
hide, they will certainly suspect us."

"They have not seen us yet. They are half a mile off," replied the
captain, as he retired to the field by the side of the road.

Somers followed him, though he did not fully approve the policy of his
friend. They walked a short distance till they came to a covert of
bushes, in which they concealed themselves.

"I think we have made a mistake. The dog always bites when you attempt to
run away from him," said Somers.

"I don't think they saw us," persisted De Banyan. "If they did, we can
tell as good a story here as we could in the road."

"I always believe in facing the music. I have found that impudence will
carry a man a great deal farther and a great deal faster than his legs
can."

"Perhaps you are right, Somers. When I was in Italy----"

"Bah! Don't say Italy or Crimea again till we reach the other side of the
river," interposed Somers, who was too seriously affected by the perils
of their situation to be willing to listen to any of his companion's
hallucinations.

"Just as you please, Somers," answered the captain, unmoved by the
rebuff; "but, when I was doing scout duty before the battle of Magenta, I
saw the advance of the Austrians coming up behind me. I crawled into a
haystack, and remained there while the whole army of the Austrians, about
four hundred thousand men, passed by me."

Somers could not but smile at the infatuation of his friend, who at such
a perilous moment could indulge in such a vicious practice as that of
inventing great stories. He did not even ask him how long it took the
Austrian army to pass the haystack, whether they had haystacks in Italy,
nor if it was probable that such an army would pass over a single road.
He waited patiently, or impatiently, for the approach of the rebel
cavalry, which soon reached the road near the bushes where they were
hidden.

To his consternation, they came to a dead halt; and he could see the men
gazing earnestly in the direction they had retired. Then half a dozen of
the troopers entered the field, and rode directly towards the covert of
bushes.

"We are caught!" whispered Somers.

"That's so. Just after the battle of Palestro, when I----"

"Hush!"

"Hush it is," replied De Banyan, as coolly as though he had been under
his shelter tent on the other side of the James.

Taking a knife from his pocket, he began to cut away at a straight bush
which grew near him, and was thus busily employed when the soldiers
reached the spot. Somers stretched himself on the ground, and waited the
issue of the event; deciding to let his companion, who had got him into
the scrape, extricate him from it. The coolness of the captain, and the
peculiar manner he assumed, convinced him that he had some resources upon
which to draw in this trying emergency.

"Hallo, there!" shouted one of the troopers savagely, as though he
intended to carry consternation in the tones of his voice.

"How are you, old hoss?" inquired De Banyan, as impudently as though he
had been the lord of the manor.

"What ye doin' in here?" demanded the horseman, as he forced his animal
into the bushes far enough to obtain a full view of both of the
fugitives.

"Well, old hoss, if Heaven gin you two eyes, what were they gin to ye
fur?" replied the captain, still hacking away at the sapling.

"What d'ye run for when you saw us coming?"

"Didn't run."

"Yes, yer did."

"You know best, then."

"What d'ye come in here fur?"

"Don't ye see what I came in here for?" replied De Banyan, as he finished
cutting off the bush, and proceeded to trim off the branches.

"Who are you?"

"Well, old hoss, I'm the brother of my father's oldest son."

"What's yer name?"

"Hain't got any; had a difficulty with the district attorney in our
county, and lost it."

"Come out here, and show yerself. The cap'n wants to see yer down to the
road."

"Just goin' down there. Say, you hain't got a spare hoss in your caravan,
have you? I'm gettin' amazin' tired."

"Come out, both of you. I can't stay here all day."

"Needn't wait for me; I'm in no hurry," answered the captain, as he
slowly emerged from the bushes, followed by Somers.

"But I shall wait for yer; and, if yer don't step along lively, I'll let
yer know how this cheese-knife feels."

"Don't distress yourself to do anything of the sort," said De Banyan; and
he hobbled along on his new-made cane.

A walk of a few rods brought them to the road, where the commander of the
company was impatiently awaiting their arrival. He looked daggers at the
travelers, and evidently intended to annihilate them by the fierceness of
his visage.

"Give an account of yourself," said he.

"We're no account," replied De Banyan.

"I've seen you before," continued the cavalry commander, gazing intently
at the captain.

"No; you saw me behind."

"That sounds like you. Why, really, it is Barney Marvel."

"Who?" demanded De Banyan with an expression of humor.

"Barney Marvel! Don't you know your own name? Give us your hand, Barney,"
added the officer, as he extended his own.

"Well, cap'n, perhaps I'm Barney what's-his-name; but, 'pon my word, I
don't think I am;" and De Banyan wore a troubled expression, even to the
eyes of his anxious companion.

"Don't be modest about it, Barney. You left us rather unceremoniously;
but I hope you'll be able to show that it was all right."

"'Pon my word it was all right, though I haven't the least idea what you
mean."

"Haven't you, indeed, Barney?" laughed the captain, who, in spite of his
present happy manner, was evidently as much puzzled as the other party.

"'Pon my word, I haven't."

"Do you mean to say you are not Barney Marvel, formerly a lieutenant in
the Third Tennessee?"

"Not if I know it."

"I suppose I understood your position, Barney; but I advise you not to
deny facts."

"I never deny facts, captain; you haven't told me your name yet."

"No need of that. Now, be honest, Barney. Tell us all about it. There
wasn't an officer in the regiment that didn't mourn you as a brother when
you left us."

"I'm very much obliged to them," replied De Banyan lightly; but even
Somers began to have some doubts in regard to his popular friend.

"How are Magenta, Solferino, and the Crimea, now-a-days?" demanded the
officer.

"Never heard of such places. Don't know much about geography," answered
the captain.

Somers was confounded when the officer repeated these words, which was
proof positive that he was the man whom the captain represented him to
be.

"Sergeant, dismount, and tell me if you find B. M. on that man's right
arm."

The sergeant obeyed, and, with the assistance of another, bared the
captain's arm, where they found, plainly marked in India ink, the
initials B. M.


CHAPTER XXI

THE THIRD TENNESSEE


Probably there was no one in either party who was so thoroughly
bewildered by the incident which had just transpired as Captain Somers.
The mystery of his companion's antecedents was in a fair way to be
cleared up, though in a very unsatisfactory manner to those most
intimately concerned. The conversation, and the verification of the rebel
officer's statements, showed that De Banyan was not De Banyan; that the
brave and brilliant Federal officer was not a Federal officer; that, of
all he had been, only the "brave" and "brilliant" remained.

It was painfully evident that the bold and dashing captain was, or had
been, a rebel officer. Somers was terribly shocked at the discovery, even
while it was a satisfaction to have the mystery of his companion's
previous life explained. For the time, he forgot the perils of his own
situation in the interest he felt in the affairs of his friend. Perhaps
De Banyan was a spy, who had been serving in the Union army for the
purpose of conveying information to the enemy. He had been very glad of
the opportunity to cross the river; and it seemed probable to our hero
that he wished to return to his friends. It is true, the efficient
services of the captain in the Army of the Potomac, his readiness at all
times to fight the rebels, and especially his shooting down the enemy's
pickets in the swamp, were not exactly consistent with such a record; but
perhaps he had done these things to keep up appearances, and thus enable
him the better to promote the objects of the rebellion.

He was anxious to hear the captain's explanation of these gross charges;
but, of course, that was utterly impracticable at present. In the
meantime, there was no room to doubt that the cavalry officer had all the
truth on his side. He had hinted very strongly that De Banyan was a
deserter; but he might have deserted for the purpose of performing the
special duty which had been assigned to him. Officers and soldiers, sent
out as spies, had often incurred the odium of such a reputation, in order
to keep their own counsels, and serve their country the more faithfully.

If Captain de Banyan was a deserter in appearance only, he would, of
course, soon be able to make his fidelity and patriotism apparent to the
rebel authorities; and being a patriot, in the traitor use of the word,
he could not do less than denounce his companion as a Federal spy.
Whatever turn the affair might take, Somers felt that his own chances of
escape were every moment becoming beautifully less. If De Banyan was a
faithful rebel, there was proof positive that his companion was a spy; if
not, he was in the company of a deserter, and would be subjected to all
manner of suspicion.

De Banyan still held his head up, and did not lose his impudence, even
after the letters had been found upon his arm. He did not appear to be at
all confused by the discovery and the triumph of the cavalry officer's
argument. He punched Somers in the side with his elbow; but the latter
was unable to divine the significance of this movement.

"Well, Barney, I wish somebody else had caught you instead of me; for it
is not pleasant to find an old friend under such circumstances."

"If you please, captain, I haven't the pleasure of knowing your name."

"Come, Barney, don't keep up this farce any longer."

"I was about to beg the favor, that you would not call me by that
offensive name any longer."

"You seem to be changing your colors very rapidly," laughed the officer.
"When I first saw you, you were a rough-spoken fellow; but now you use
the language of a polished gentleman. Barney, you and I were good friends
in the Third Tennessee; and, though I am sorry to meet you under these
circumstances, we must both make the best of it."

"I tell you, captain, you are entirely mistaken in your man. I never was
in Tennessee in my life."

"Good! You were always celebrated for monstrous stories; and they are
fully in keeping with your past history. Well, since you refuse to
recognize an old friend, of course I shall be excused for any unpleasant
measures to which I may be compelled to resort."

"Anything you please, captain, so long as you refrain from calling me
Barney, which in my estimation is a low and vulgar cognomen, that I am
unwilling to have applied to me."

"Who is the man with you?" demanded the officer in more business-like
tones.

"His name is Tom Leathers; he's a pilot on the James. We refer you to
Captain Osborn for evidence of our character. We came here to do a job
for him."

"All right, then. Captain Osborn lodges at the next house on this road,
and we will let him speak for the other man. He can't speak for you; for
I know you better than he does, or any other man who has not served in
the Third Tennessee. As you were going this way, you can walk along with
us."

"Thank you for the polite invitation, and this is a handsome escort for a
man of my humble pretensions."

The captain of the company ordered his men to keep back, and Somers and
De Banyan walked by the side of his horse, a few yards in advance of the
platoons. He had evidently adopted this method to draw out his prisoners;
for as such our officers were compelled to regard themselves.

"Marvel, you used to be a very sensible fellow when you were in the Third
Tennessee," said the rebel captain. "I am surprised to see you adopting
such a stupid method to conceal your identity."

"I had good reasons for it," replied De Banyan, casting his eyes behind
him, as if to assure himself that none of the soldiers were within
hearing.

"What reasons?" asked the officer curiously.

"I should think a man of your discretion would easily understand the
reason, without any explanation. If I am to be tried for any offense, I
don't want to be judged by a whole company of cavalry. You know I always
took pride in my reputation."

"I used to think so; but, when we missed you one day, we got rid of that
opinion in the Third Tennessee."

"Then you wronged me; for I have faithfully served my country from that
day to this."

"I am glad to hear it, and I hope you will be able to prove what you have
said. How came you here?"

"I came over from the other side of the river last night. You intimated
that my departure from the Third was not all regular," added the captain.

"In a word, it was understood that you had deserted."

"That was a mistake."

"I am very glad to hear it; but you will remember that your loyalty to
the Southern Confederacy was not above suspicion when you joined the
regiment."

De Banyan punched Somers with his elbow at these words, as though he
wished him to take particular notice of them; but his admiring friend
needed no such admonition to induce him to give strict attention to the
statement, for it was the most satisfactory remark he had heard during
the interview. Captain de Banyan rose twenty-five per cent in his
estimation at the utterance of those words, however injurious they were
in the opinion of him who had spoken them. There was hope for the
captain; and Somers trusted that he would be able fully to exonerate
himself from the foul charge, when the occasion should permit such an
exposition.

"My loyalty ought to be considered above suspicion, and those who know me
best do so regard it," added De Banyan as he administered another mild
punch on the ribs of his fellow-sufferer. "I was taken by the Yankees, in
short; and, at the first convenient opportunity, I have come over to see
you again."

"I hope it is all right, Barney; but I am afraid it is not."

"I shall be able to clear myself of every imputation of disloyalty,
before the proper tribunal."

"How did you get over?"

"I have been following the fortunes of the Yankee army till last night;
when I took a boat, and came over the river. On the way I met a pilot
whose name was Andy, who turned me over to this man, who is also a pilot,
and came down to take out a fire-ship."

"The one that was burned in the creek last night?"

"The same. I refer you to Captain Osborn for the truth of the last part
of my statement; though the time was when you did not ask me to bring
vouchers for what I said."

"For nothing, except your stories of the Crimea and the Italian war,"
replied the captain of cavalry with a significant smile. "I must do you
the justice to say, that I never knew you to tell a falsehood on any
matter connected with your social or business relations."

"Thank you for so much," replied De Banyan. "Now that I have made it all
right, I suppose you needn't trouble yourself to attend to my affairs any
further."

"No trouble at all, I assure you. Under the circumstances, I shall feel
it my duty to deliver you into the hands of my superiors, and they can do
as they please with you. But I sincerely hope that you will be able to
vindicate your character from the stain which rests upon it."

"I don't think it needs any vindication."

"There is some difference of opinion between us on that point. Where are
you going now?"

"To Richmond," replied De Banyan promptly; and perhaps he intended to go
there with the Army of the Potomac, though its present prospects of
reaching the rebel capital were not very favorable.

"This is not the way to Richmond. Your stories don't agree very well."

"I thought it was; or rather to Petersburg, and from there we expected to
get a ride up in the cars."

"Oh, very well! I can procure you a pass to Richmond," added the rebel.

"And an escort to attend us, I suppose," replied De Banyan with a smile.

"A small one; but here is the house where Captain Osborn lodges. If he
knows your friend here, and can vouch for his loyalty, all well; if not,
we shall not part two such loving friends."

Captain Osborn had not risen when the company of cavalry reached his
quarters; but he was called from his bed, and appeared in front of the
house in the worst possible humor; for, being human, he did not like to
have his slumbers disturbed by unseasonable calls. As Somers feared
Captain Osborn denied all knowledge of the prisoners, except so far as
related to his interview with them during the night. He had never seen
either of them before; and he even took the trouble to add that he didn't
believe the young fellow was a pilot, which was gratuitous and uncalled
for on his part.

"Well, Marvel," added the cavalry officer rather coldly, "this business
is settled very much as I supposed it would be. I shall have to send you
up to Richmond, where, if your stories are all true, I doubt not you will
be able to clear yourself."

"Thank you, captain. You are the same affectionate fellow you used to be
when you were a lieutenant in the Third Tennessee," replied De Banyan
with a sneer; for it was evident that he was not at all pleased with the
result of the affair.

Four soldiers were detailed from the company to conduct the prisoners to
a certain camp near the railroad at City Point, and there deliver them
over to the keeping of an officer whose name was mentioned.

"Good-morning, captain," said De Banyan with forced gayety.

"Good-morning, Marvel, and success to you."

"Thank you."

"By the way, Barney, if there is anything I can do for you, don't fail to
call upon me; that is, anything consistent with the duty of a faithful
officer."

"Such a remark was entirely uncalled for," said De Banyan with dignity.
"Do you think I would ask an officer to sacrifice his conscience?"

"Excuse me, Barney. I meant no offense," added the rebel captain, touched
by the proud and dignified manner of his former friend.

"Your words and your conduct are in keeping with each other."

"Really, Barney, I meant nothing by the remark."

"Then it was the more unmanly to make it."

"I am still your friend. In proof of it, permit me to do you a favor,"
pleaded the rebel, much concerned at the wound he had inflicted on the
sensitive nature of his late associate in the Third Tennessee.

"I ask no favors," answered De Banyan proudly.

"You are too hard upon me. Upon my word, I meant no offense. As a proof
of my friendship, I will take your parole of honor not to escape, and you
shall report at Richmond at your own pleasure. If you have any interest
in this young man, I will allow him the same favor."

"After what has happened, I cannot accept a favor at your hands. I can't
see how an officer who doubts my word should be willing to take my
parole."

"As you please, Marvel," added the captain petulantly. "I can do no more
for you."

Somers was greatly relieved when the rebel officer rode off, followed by
his company. He had trembled with anxiety, when the parole was offered to
De Banyan, lest he should accept it, and thus compel him to do the same.
Although he could not see how it was to be brought about, he intended to
escape from the hands of his captors at the first convenient opportunity,
with or without De Banyan, as the case should demand.

One of the four troopers detailed to guard the prisoners was a sergeant,
who intimated to them that they might take up the line of march for the
camp where they were bound. To preclude the possibility of an escape, he
ordered two of his men to ride ahead of the captives, while himself and
the other followed in the rear. The little procession moved off; and
there was never a sadder-hearted young man than Somers, who, were his
true character discovered, was liable to the pains and penalties of being
a spy.

"Sergeant, have you been to breakfast?" demanded De Banyan, after they
had walked a couple of miles, and were passing a farm-house.

"No, sir."

"I smell fried bacon, and am willing to pay for breakfast for the whole
party. What do you say?"

"There is nothing in my orders to prevent me from taking up your offer;
and I will do it, if you will agree not to run away while we are at the
house," replied the prudent soldier.

"How shall we run away, with four men watching us?" demanded De Banyan.

The sergeant seemed to be satisfied with this argument; and they entered
the house, where breakfast was soon in preparation for them.


CHAPTER XXII

THE REBEL FARM-HOUSE


Somers, besides the chagrin caused by his capture, was greatly disturbed
by the astounding discoveries he had made in regard to Captain de Banyan.
He was extremely anxious to obtain an opportunity to converse with him in
relation to his disgraceful antecedents; but the presence of the rebel
soldiers prevented him from saying a word. Yet his looks must have
betrayed the distrust he felt in his companion; for De Banyan seemed to
study his face more than the faces of their captors.

By this time, the six trusty soldiers who had been selected to
participate in the enterprise must have given them up, and returned to
the camp with the sad story of their capture. It was mortifying to Somers
to have such a report carried to the general of the division; for it
seemed to be an imputation upon his skill and tact; but he found some
consolation in believing that he should not have been taken if it had not
been for his unfortunate connection with Captain de Banyan, who was rash
beyond measure in venturing within the rebel lines, unless he really
meant to return to the Third Tennessee.

Whatever the captain was, and whatever he intended to do, Somers could
not believe that his late friend had deliberately betrayed him into the
hands of the enemy. It might be so; or it might be that to save himself
from the consequences of his alleged desertion, he would claim to have
been always a faithful adherent of the Southern Confederacy. Somers was
perplexed beyond description by the perils and uncertainties of his
situation. He had, in fact, lost confidence in his companion; and the
result was, that he resolved to make his escape, if he could, from the
hands of the rebels without him. Under other circumstances, he would have
deemed it infamous to harbor, for an instant, the thought of deserting a
friend in the hour of extremity; and nothing but the remembrance of the
Third Tennessee could have induced him to adopt such a resolution. Having
adopted it, he kept his eyes wide open for any opportunity which would
favor his purpose. His curiosity, excited to the highest pitch to know
what the captain could say in defense of the heinous charge which had
been fastened upon him by the rebel cavalry officer, and which he himself
had substantiated, rendered the intention to part company with him very
disagreeable; but the terror of a rebel prison, and perhaps a worse fate,
were potent arguments in its favor.

In the course of half an hour, the breakfast was ready, and the party sat
down with a hearty relish to discuss it. The fried bacon and biscuit were
luxuries to Somers, and he partook of them with a keener satisfaction
than he did of the costly viands of the "Continental" and the "National;"
but, deeply as he was interested in this pleasant employment, he hardly
ceased for a moment to think of the grand project of making his escape.
For the time, this had become the great business of existence, and he
banished from his mind all minor questions.

Opportunity is seldom wanting to those who are resolutely determined to
do great deeds. Only the slow-molded and irresolute want a time and a
place. The breakfast was finished, and the troopers and their prisoners
were on excellent terms with each other long before the conclusion of the
repast. Eating and drinking promote the social feeling; and Captain de
Banyan was as brilliant as he had ever been in the camps of the
Chickahominy. He made the rebels laugh, and excited their wonder by the
most improbable stories in which even he had ever indulged. It would have
been impossible to distinguish between the captives and the captors; for
the latter were extremely considerate, as they had probably been
instructed to be by the captain of the company.

When the meal was finished, the troopers rose, and proposed to resume the
journey. De Banyan paid the bill in gold; for there was still a small
portion of the precious metal in the army.

"Now we are ready," said the sergeant; "and we will get our horses. It's
a pity we haven't horses for you; but, when you get tired, we will give
you the use of the saddles for a time."

"Thank you, my friend. That's handsome. You remind me of a Russian
major-general, who insisted that I should ride his animal while he walked
by my side, after I was taken prisoner in the battle of Austerlitz."

"He was a good fellow," replied the sergeant, who probably did not
remember the precise date of the celebrated battle quoted by the
versatile captain. "We shall not be behind him; and, if you like, you
shall have the first ride on my horse."

"Thank you; but I couldn't think of depriving you of your horse, even for
a moment."

"Well, we will settle all that by and by. Come with me now, if you
please," said the sergeant, as he led the way out of the house.

As very little attention seemed to be paid to Somers--for the rebels
evidently did not regard him as either a slippery or a dangerous
person--he was permitted to bring up the rear. Now, it is always
mortifying to be held in slight esteem, especially to a sensitive mind
like that of our hero; and he resented the slight by declining to follow
the party. Near the outside door, as they passed out, he discovered
another door, which was ajar, and which led up-stairs. Without any waste
of valuable time, he slyly stepped through the doorway, and ascended the
stairs. The rebels were so busy in listening to the great stories of
Captain de Banyan, that they did not immediately discover the absence of
the unpretending young man.

When our resolute adventurer saw the stairs through the partially open
door, they suggested to him a method of operations. It is true, he did
not have time to elaborate the plan, and fully determine what he should
do when he went up-stairs; but the general idea, that he could drop out
of a window and escape in the rear of the house, struck him forcibly, and
he impulsively embraced the opportunity thus presented. The building was
an ordinary Virginia farm-house, rudely constructed, and very imperfectly
finished. On ascending the stairs, Somers reached a large, unfinished
apartment, which was used as a store-room. From it opened, at each end of
the house, a large chamber.

No place of concealment, which was apparently suitable for his purpose,
presented itself; and, without loss of time, he mounted a grain chest,
and ascended to the loft over one of the rooms; for the beams were not
floored in the middle of the building. The aspect of this place was not
at all hopeful; for there were none of those convenient "cubby holes,"
which most houses contain, wherein he could bestow his body with any hope
of escaping even a cursory search for him.

In the gable end, on one side of the chimney, which, our readers are
aware, is generally built on the outside of the structure, in Virginia,
was a small window, one-half of which, in the decay of the glass panes,
had been boarded up to exclude the wind and the rain. The job had
evidently been performed by a bungling hand, and had never been more than
half done. The wood was as rotten as punk; and without difficulty, and
without much noise, the fugitive succeeded in removing the board which
had covered the lower part of the window.

By this time the absence of the prisoner had been discovered, and the
rebels were in a state of high excitement on account of it; but Somers
was pleased to find they had not rightly conjectured the theory of his
escape. He could hear them swear, and hear them considering the direction
in which he had gone. Two of them stood under the window, to which Somers
had restored the board he had removed; and he could distinctly hear all
that they said.

"Of course he did," said one of them. "He slipped round the corner of the
house when we came out."

"If he did, where is he? It's open ground round here; and he couldn't
have gone ten rods before we missed him."

"The captain will give it to me," replied the other, whose voice the
fugitive recognized to be that of the sergeant.

"We shall find him," added the other. "He can't be twenty rods from here
now."

"I did not think of the young fellow running off, but kept both eyes on
the other all the time; for I thought he wasn't telling all those stories
for nothing."

"Maybe he is in the house," suggested the other.

Somers thought that was a very bad suggestion of the rebel soldier; and,
if there had been any hope of their believing him, he would himself have
informed them that he was not in the house, and reconciled his conscience
as best he could to the falsehood.

"Can't yer find 'em?" demanded a third person, which Somers saw, through
the aperture he had left between the board and the window, was the
farmer.

"We haven't lost but one."

"He can't be fur from this yere."

"Isn't he in the house?" demanded the sergeant anxiously.

"No; I saw them both foller yer out."

"So did I," added the farmer's wife, who had come out to learn the cause
of the excitement.

"Well, then, we must beat about here, and find him;" and the party
beneath the window moved away in the rear of the house.

Thus far, the project was hopeful; but it was apparent to Somers that the
rebels would not leave the place without searching the house, after they
had satisfied themselves that the fugitive was not hidden in any of the
out-buildings of the farm. If they did so, his situation would at once
become hopeless, if he remained where he was. The remembrance of his
former experience in a chimney, in another part of Virginia, caused him
to cast a wistful eye at the great stone structure which adorned the end
of the building. At that time, he had occupied his smoky quarters with
the knowledge and consent of the lady of the house. But now his secret
was lodged in his own breast alone; not even Captain de Banyan knew where
he was, or what he proposed to do.

When the party beneath the window left the place, he carefully removed
the board, and thrust out his head to reconnoiter the position. The only
way by which he could enter the chimney, which his former experience and
prejudice assured him was the only safe place in the vicinity, was by the
top. so Bittgesang rustled the humanity of the new community: Come, Holy
Spirit, you are creative! The marble shape our break! That wall is no
longer sick and hard to the wells of this world umstarrt that together we
and top How interwoven flames rage!

- -- - - That is no longer a distant and unparalleled care to the
other creeps That jauchzend we gaze, hand, mouth and hair, and in
ourselves to know your attributes. The poet is the first prayer and
profoundly true: "In this world the messenger, a mediator who spurned
to be is your fate, "he announces the Archangel -" The fact that your
kingdom of this world not of this world, "this discovery," is, o poet,
your birthday. " And it reveals, and redeems the poet behind the world
of appearance of the real world. From the world of the poor, the servants,
the convicts, the Droschkengäule of vipers, toads and Aases he prefers
the deceptive veil of appearances and reveals the mystery of God. He
wants nothing more than "flight and errand" of the Eternal, "a streichelnde
hand" to all the solitary-ängstenden creatures of the divine
communicates warmth and love.

Not the "vanity of the word" only the purity and goodness of the soul
gives him the power of revelation and salvation: "The good man" is the
liberator of the world: And where is he, and his hands spread ... breaking
the unjust of all creation And all things are God and one. Not the
appearance and to flee before the time off, but the phenomenon
durchseelen to adore, is the meaning of creation, after it once
in the Fall of separation from God is fallen.

In the world God wants to reveal and be redeemed. Taking calls in the
"Dialogue on the Wall of Paradise", where Adam, tired of the
appearance change, the old unit in paradise reclaimed and God and
sacrifice him: "Listen to me to start , "But God has him back into
the world: child, as I thee redeemed with my blood, So were I crying,
that you saved me.

Werfel is original, intimate, often-Franciscan childlike in its religiosity,
straight, sure longing grows and its seal to heaven, like a Gothic
tower (only in the "Judgment" wins the corrosive power of reflection).

Rainer Maria Rilke, the older Prager (born 1875), religious poetry
is the more ornamental tower on the abundance and restlessness of
Gothic sculptures of saints, animals and ornaments.

She has no original, unauthorized and strut Baukraft. Rilke is the output
of an old aristocratic Kaerntner sex, refined, tired, homeless.

In constant traveling, he moved from Vienna, Munich, Berlin, Russia, Paris,
Italy.

He lives like his characters' way of life "does not enter into life, through
life. The deepest revelations, there was not the immediate life, but
indirectly: the art. Only in the painters and their Worpsweder atmosphere
it is the emotional significance of the landscape, only in art and the
artist Rodin the religious significance of the human experience.
Rodin, he confesses, he had "learned everything I knew not previously
opened by his quiet, infinite in depth before going public service, through
its secure, nothing shook loneliness, through his great Versammeltsein
to himself." His book on Rodin is perhaps its deepest and richest
plant.

Like Rodin, the Gothic under the educators, the human body dissolves into
soul, it solves Rilkes "book of hours" with the three books "The monastic
life," "From the pilgrimage" from poverty and the death of the body and
things in god. "There was a time where the people are burying God in
heaven ... But a new faith began ... The God, who fled from the heavens,
the earth will he come back." Thus Rilke reveals God in the children,
the girls, the people, the poor, the peasants of the countryside, and
more than the people in the things: "Because it is that God hung on the
heart - not from him fortgegangen are. " But this revelation is not
growing as Werfel directly from life and share dichotomy of sacred and
certainty, it grows from the desire of the homeless artist and
spectator, and from the knowledge of many religious ideas and
symbols.

A Russian monk, the makers and writers of the book of hours, and the
whole mood richness of Russian monasteries, domes, icon, Gossudars is
used. Other religious poem cycles, such as the "Angel Songs" and the "songs
of the girls in Mary" are präraffaelitische memories mood makers. And
the "New Poems", which in the fullness of their images, the
relationship of the individual phenomena of the last processes and
forms of life want to do so not out of the pressing unit and depth
of the original sense of the world, but in the psychological or
mental orbit of a theme .

Often designed, artistically appealing already plays around particular
topics attract Rilke: Abisag, David before Saul, Pieta, San Sebastian,
Orpheus and Eurydice, Alkestis, Birth of Venus, Sappho, etc.

Eranna to life in these pictures looks and creates the soul is home, the
Life itself is closed. And she brings them all their human and artistic
sensitivity and awareness as a gift. Early Rilke has its linguistic style
created by such a peculiarity that he is the frontier of fashion touches.
Inconspicuous words he knows to be whole staff, spent their pictures
on Ursinn due parables preziös expand.

Through rhyme, Binnenreim and accumulation of Endreims he knows a
Slavic language of the softness and fullness to Klang. In the last book
of poems, the "New Poems, second part, however, wins the Artistic area
of concern. The tendency to mysticism is danger and escape for a time,
taking the form of personality to win again, will not give up. Not
ichflüchtig, but in the deepest ichsüchtig had to be the poet, used to
form the new poetry: to form the new people wanted to penetrate. And
if anyone by the time came round to her, even if Richard Dehmel, the
strongest educators whose decomposed elements crumbling remained in the
hands, so could only be the pure form of personality, the new human
form of it from the beginning except time and time against de
undertook.

Thus, the personality and poetry Stefan Georges (born 1866) has
become the form.

The will to form was the essence of Georges Act early.

He himself recalls that his forces in the form of the Roman Empire,
of Catholicism, the Rhenish landscape in the blood to remove that.

First, this will shape his aesthetic conscious. The leaves of the art
"which he founded in 1892, encouraged - by the Präraffaeliten influenced
by French poets and, like Baudelaire, Verlaine, Mallarmé, Villiers
- an" art for art, "saw" in any event, any age only a means of
artistic excitement. " But behind this desire for aesthetic and
created rang at George - not with his followers - the desire for
human beings and forms.

And because he in his own time was not because of their decomposed elements
also no pure forms were to form, his soul escaped temporarily to other
times and places ", where the original form of humanity in their search
for purity and vivid to renew. In Algabal, the Roman Emperor priests, he
found his old counter-image: the youth, which is required, regardless of
a melt to the outside world and a life rich and pure beauty, pure
forms to create: creation, where only he awakened and managed, Where
its no other than the desire turns, And so to the wind and the
weather gebeut.

The shadow of Ludwig II blows through these verses. But at the presumptuousness
of Einsam-arrogant shatters this world. Away from the isolation and the
late Herrschertums flee the "shepherds poems" in the mythic archetype
refined naturally beautiful and pure humanity, which the Greeks first
observed and have formed. Here begins the deep affinity with the
ancient Georges clearly were. Christianity had, in his world of volatility,
its metaphysical yearning and scoring form explosives elements are
included in only the southern and Rhenish Catholicism were in
heaven and earth and joy of life has remained a pictorial.

Georges pure form of desire could only genugtun an ancient belief in the
God and world, soul and body are completely penetrated, and in
the beauty of the shape to get perfect form. "The bodyguard vergotten
and verleiben God", that was everything to him the meaning of world events,
nature and art is met. For these religious task required the sealing of
a full renewal of its form substance: the language. And from the
beginning, George comes mind, epigonenhaft consumed the elements
of the German language to be set up.

He was in the spirit and sound of seven foreign languages intruded. In
tireless translations he had enriched the German language, and hammered
durchglüht. In the "Algabal" was his very own language has become, there
were no acceptances and consumed more elements in it, she was again
originally was able to clean his new. Care and life forms in the language
of pure form to content. Now George was strong enough from his
flight into the world of history to return no more archetypal past
to renew, but to banish Urkräfte.

In the "Year of the soul" (1897) reveals his original form of nature.
Nature is not it contrary to the spirit or soul, he is the living unity
of both, original and eternal as the ancient world, which no entgötterte
and natural entseelte knew. To appear in the "Year of the soul," the
original form of nature, the seasons, in images of spatial
representationalism and color and also the deepest Seelenhaftigkeit.

The soul is looking for is not here - like Goethe - the nature, to get
to her to find out, both argue in original, cosmic unit. Archetype of
nature reveal itself as a prototype of the soul, the soul as an
archetype archetype of the landscape. Thus, there is no mood, but
fate of images, these poems create. The fullness of the highlights of the
autumn day, the ripe harvest calm and clarity, the peace of the performance,
but the verse Hebbel already ahnend durchschauert: "So much in
life is to be close to death."

How are the soul and one in such a landscape poem, we move up and down in
the rich flakes Des Ganges book almost to the gates And see in the
box outside of the almond tree grid for the second time in Flore.

We look for the shadow-free benches, where we never flushed alien voices,
In our dreams are interlocking arms, we refresh ourselves on the
long, warm glow.

We feel grateful to be quiet as showers from radiation traces tops
dripping from us, And only look and listen, if breaks in the ripe fruit
to the ground knocking. George was only after the original form of the
history and nature experiences, renewed and banned, he is refined and
gestählt to the consecration of the appeal. Now it appears the angel of
the "Prelude": "The beautiful life sends me to you - as a messenger."
The spirit of life appears to him now, the "beautiful life", the
mere existence everything is unity and clear form. The lifts him to the
holy height of the consignment.

The pure forms that he has just learned and renewed - now it can with a
look at the original source and create a life of waiting for his
consecration, in which every hour is useful to classify, creatively
justify wants.

But the grace of Appeals invites the victim, the devotion, the exclusive
service of the appeal. From earthly happiness and warmth, he continues
to altitude, mountain solitude, Gipfeleisigkeit.

"Georges is just foreplay poem, obey the same strict behest, the forced
Zarathustra: I am the law of life and salvation in God to blind
and weltwirrer time, but not for all and none, but out of this one.

When a poet more than just an I, then there is the other, and what he
calls, awakens the ears to hear him.

Should he fill in the circle, it must give the middle and keep the rays,
not the extent of running.

S I designed to meet the finish was Georges primary concern, and that he
has not received from the Far, but by the neighbor, his own heart.

But precisely this bid was the answer to the question of life ...
and it is filled, as a poet, he found his form, his ausfocht dispute,
said his word, he did what at the time was.

Dantes Act was: God ... Look i Goethes: Document world ... Georges:
Personalize life.

The dangers, sufferings, delights and duties of this law, he proclaims
in the prologue of the opening up to the completion. " (Gundolf.)
thus consecrated the first interview from the spirit of life the
"carpet of life" (1900) to draw the spiritual archetype of humanity
in nature and history, "the forces of European-German education in
various human forms of creation, from the ground beginnings to the
intellectual activity and work of Genius. " (Gundolf.) as "an epic
of Erdgeistes" begins the series with the mother's why all humanity,
the "landscape" in which humans, animals and the earth still
unconsciously and agree: "grub patriarch, Erzmutter whey, - The
Destiny nourishing for an entire people.

"For the first time in this epic image appears in the People's Georges
works as a prototype of humanity and as a prototype of his humanity,
the German people.

In foreplay, the Spirit of life from him the magical landscapes of the south
to "the simple lands," the "strict line art" of the domestic,
Rhenish landscape: It no longer attracts the miracle of the lagoons,
The allumworbene, Rome large debris, like autumn oak smell flowers
and vines, as they, the people of thy guard Hort - How your waves
- live green power, now it is the people as a clear prototype, which
includes himself, the nature and historical forces of the German
people.

His mission is to become Germany's mission: By the pure forces of
the German people to be in shape, is he also the educators of his
nation. - - "The Body of God vergotten and verleiben": the unity
of world and God, nature and spirit, body and soul was Georges-belief
and mission.

You should and he had to experience shiver created.

The supreme symbol of this unity is the God-man.

And if ever the human race of this symbol was needed for its completion -
George was not satisfied with his belief in scattered images to
create a look and they had him in a condensed form.

That was the highest possibility of his belief. And his form tendons
and sake was the highest possibility of the highest necessity.

So he looked in and Maximin, the beloved figure of a beautiful, early
and died young disciple, the image of the God-man, it was perfect
the world. "We went," says Georges Maximin in speech, "a disfigured and
cooled against humanity, dealing with their properties and ramified
vielspältigen sensations boasted, however, the great and indeed the great
love was on Entschwinden. masses created rule and bid and suffocating
with Lug flatter the interpretation of tongues Rufer, formerly of
murder mildly removed : unclean hands eincm dug into piles of
Flitterstücken, worein the real gems were randomly geworten. cut
baffled impotence disguised arrogance and brazen laughter heralded
the downfall of the sanctuary. "

Though the name was his own, the invitation was evidently not intended
for him; and he remained quietly on his perch, waiting for further
developments.

"Hev they all gone, dad?" asked the deserter.

"Yes; all gone. Yer kin come down now."

The renegade, then, was the son of the farmer; which accounted for the
unwillingness of the latter to have the house searched by the soldiers;
and, though Somers had a general contempt for deserters, he felt his
indebtedness to this interesting family for the service they had
unwittingly endeavored to render him.

Tom--Somers wanted to have his name changed then--Tom descended from his
position in the chimney. It was an easy matter; for the kitchen was at
the other end of the house, and there had been no fire on this hearth for
many a month.

"Dad," said this graceless son of a graceless sire.

"Go and wash yer face, Tom. Ye're blacker than Black Jack."

"Dad, there's another man up the chimley. We come near havin' a fight up
there. I told him what I would do; and he got skeered, and went up top."

"What d'yer mean, Tom?" demanded the patriarch.

Tom stated again, more explicitly than before, the subject matter of his
startling communication.

"I reckon he's a Yank, dad; he talks like one, but says he b'longs to the
Forty-fust Virginny. I know he's a Yank. I kin smell one a mile off."

Somers was flattered; but he was not angry at the compliment, and calmly
waited for an invitation to join the family below.

"He's the feller that gin the soldiers the slip," added the father. "The
sergeant says he's a Yank; but t'other prisoner says he's a James River
pilot."

"I know he's a Yank. He'd 'a' killed me if I hadn't skeered him off."

"I reckon he skeered you more'n you skeered him," added the head of the
family, who appeared not to have a very high opinion of his son's
courage. "We'll smoke him out, Tom. Go'n git some pitch-wood and sich
truck."

Somers had a very strong objection to being smoked out, and he commenced
a forward and downward movement in the direction of the assailing party.
Fearing that some unworthy advantage might be taken of his lower
extremities before he could assume an attitude of defense, he drew his
pistol, and placed himself a few feet above the fire-place. Tom returned
with the fuel, and the old man ordered him to make a fire.

"One moment, if you please," said Somers. "I'll shoot the first man of
you that attempts to make a fire there."

With an exclamation of terror, Tom retreated from the hearth; and Somers,
improving the opportunity, leaped down from his perch. Stepping out from
the great fire-place, he stood in the presence of the hopeful son and
sire.


CHAPTER XXIV

A BROKEN BARGAIN


Somers was entirely satisfied with himself when he stood in the presence
of the farmer and his son; and, so far as they were concerned, he had no
fears for the future. The redoubtable Tom retired to one corner of the
room, and, full of terror, awaited the issue. The father was the braver
of the two, and stood in the middle of the floor, confronting the
pestilent Yankee who had thus so unceremoniously invaded his house.

"Who be you?" demanded the old man.

"No matter who I am," replied Somers, with the pistol still in his hand.
"I propose to spend the day with you, and will pay for everything I
have."

"Perhaps yer will stay here, and perhaps yer won't," replied the farmer
doggedly.

"There's no perhaps about it; I intend to stay here."

"I s'pose yer don't keer whether I'm willing or not."

"On the contrary, I do care. I had much rather stay with your consent
than without."

"Well, then, yer won't stay with my consent."

"Then I shall stay without it," answered Somers, with a degree of
decision which was exceedingly annoying to his involuntary host.

"No, yer won't," growled the farmer.

"I will pay you well for the use of this room, and for all that I eat and
drink," said Somers, wishing to be fully understood.

"Yer can't stay here."

"No, yer can't," added Tom.

"I have made you a fair offer, and am willing to do what is right; and,
as I said before, I intend to stay here till to-night, whether you are
willing or not."

"Yer kin put up your pistol; I ain't afeerd on it."

"I have no desire to use the pistol to your injury, and shall not do so
unless in self-defense. You know that I am a fugitive."

"A nigger, by gracious!" exclaimed the farmer, whose vocabulary was very
limited, and who had no idea that the word "fugitive" could mean anything
but a runaway negro.

"You know that the soldiers are after me, and it will not be safe for me
to leave this house before dark. I'm not a nigger; and it makes no
difference to you what I am."

"You are a dirty Yankee; and I'd rather hev a hundred niggers in my house
than one Yankee."

"That's a matter of taste. If you are fond of negroes, I don't interfere
with you for that."

"Shet up!" snarled the farmer, highly displeased with the answer of the
fugitive. "I won't hev a Yankee in my house a single hour."

"Very well; we won't argue the matter. You can do anything you please
about it," replied Somers with perfect indifference as he seated himself
in a chair.

"Then yer kin leave."

"I shall not leave; on the contrary, I shall remain here till night."

"I reckon we'll see about that. I'll jest go down and call up two or
three of them soldiers, and let 'em know you're a Yankee. I calkilate
they'll tote you out of this rather sudden."

"Go ahead!" replied Somers coolly.

"I reckon ye'll tell another story by the time they git here."

"I reckon your son Tom will too," added the unwelcome guest.

"See here, dad; that won't work, nohow," interposed the hopeful son.
"They'll ketch me if yer do."

"Exactly so," added Somers, who, of course, had depended upon the
situation of the rebel deserter for his own safety.

The farmer looked at his intractable guest, and then upon his dutiful
son; and the idea tardily passed through his dull brain that the soldiers
would be just as dangerous to the welfare of the son as to the visitor.
Probably he had intended, when the military force came, to send Tom up
the chimney, as he had done a dozen times before; but the secret was no
longer in the keeping of the family alone.

"I see you understand the case perfectly," said Somers, as he
contemplated with intense satisfaction the blank dismay of both father
and son. "If you had the wisdom of Solomon, you couldn't comprehend it
any better."

"I reckon ye're about right, stranger," replied the farmer.

"You can see now it is for your interest as well as mine that we make
friends. Tom's safety and mine are both the same thing. The best you can
do is to take good care of me to-day, and at night help me to make my way
over to the other side of the river."

"Then yer be a Yank?"

"I didn't say so. Tom can go with me if he likes. He will be safer there
than here."

"Tom?"

"If he is a deserter from the rebel army, he will be caught sooner or
later, and be shot. He will be safe on the other side of the river."

"Go over to the Yanks! He hates 'em wurs'n pizin. Don't yer, Tom?"

"Bet yer life I do, dad," replied the hopeful son. "I won't go over thar,
nohow."

"Just as he pleases about that. I only wanted to do him a friendly act."

"Well, stranger, I don't mind keepin' yer to-day; but Tom can't go with
yer."

"Very well; then I will stay in this room; and, if the soldiers come, I
can go up the chimney with Tom," replied Somers. "I'm tired and sleepy.
Didn't sleep a wink last night. I will take a nap on the floor. You will
wake me, Tom, if there's any danger; won't you?"

"Yes, I'll wake yer," replied the deserter with a broad grin.

"We'll see that you don't git caught; kase, if yer do, of course, Tom'll
git caught too," added the farmer.

There was something in his manner which Somers did not like. Though he
was a man of dull mind, there was a kind of low cunning visible in his
look and manner which warned Somers to be cautious. He stretched himself
on the floor; and the farmer and his son left the room, closing the door
behind them.

Our scout was, as he had before declared, both tired and sleepy; but rest
and sleep were luxuries in which he could not permit himself to indulge
in the midst of so much peril and so many enemies. As soon as the door
closed behind the sire and the son, he rose from his reclining posture,
and hastened to reconnoiter the position. The enemy--for such he was
fully assured his host was--passed through the entry and out the door at
the back of the house, as Somers discovered from the noise of their
retreating footsteps.

There was a window in the rear of the room, which commanded a full view
of them as they paused near the door to consider the situation. Somers
raised the sash a little, so that he could hear what they said, not
doubting that his own case would be the subject of the conversation.

"Don't you do it, dad," protested Tom in answer to some proposition which
the farmer had made before the listener came within hearing distance of
them.

"Don't yer be skeert, Tom. The feller's gone ter sleep in there, and the
soldiers kin hurry him off afore he wakes up. Don't yer see, Tom? I
reckon the Yank's an officer, and they'll give me suthin handsome fur
ketchin him."

"Yes; but, dad, they'll get suthin handsome fur ketchin me too."

"You kin hide, as yer allers does when they comes."

"But the Yank will blow on me."

"What if he does?"

"He'll tell 'em I'm up chimley, and then they'll look fur me."

"Tom, ye're a bigger fool'n yer father!" said the farmer petulantly.
"Can't yer hide in t'other place down suller?"

"It looks kinder skeery, dad," replied the doubtful son.

"Yer used ter hide down suller more'n yer did up chimley. But don't yer
see, Tom, arter I've called in the soldiers, and give up the Yank,
they'll think I'm a patriot, and won't b'leeve nothin' a dirty Yank can
say agin' me."

"Well, dad, I hate the Yank as bad as you do; but yer must be keerful."

"Now go and see that the feller don't wake up and run off, and I'll go
down arter a sergeant and half a dozen men. When yer hear us comin', just
step down suller'n crawl inter the drean. Git the feller's pistol out of
his pocket, if yer kin, while he's asleep."

"What a precious old scoundrel that man is!" thought Somers, as he
retreated from the window, and threw himself on the floor where the
farmer had left him.

He almost regretted that he had not used his pistol on the treacherous
old villain, who had made a fair bargain with him, and agreed to the
terms of the contract. The wretch had actually gone after the soldiers to
entrap him, and Tom was to remain and keep watch of him in the meantime.
Taking the revolver from his pocket, he thrust it under his blouse; still
keeping his hand upon it, so as to make sure that the deserter did not
carry out his part of the programme. Thus prepared for the conflict which
might ensue, or for any other event, he closed his eyes, and pretended to
be asleep.

Presently the door softly opened, and Tom crept into the room. He had
taken off his shoes, that his step on the uncarpeted floor might not
disturb his prey, and stole towards him. After approaching as near to the
prostrate form as he dared, he bent over him to determine in which pocket
the pistol had been placed. Somers was tempted to grapple him by the
throat, as he listened to the young villain's subdued breathing; but he
feared that he would scream if he did so, and it was necessary to achieve
his conquest in a more gentle manner.

He moved his body a little, as if his slumbers were disturbed by
unpleasant dreams; and added a noise like a snore to complete the
delusion. Tom retired for a moment till his victim should again be
composed; but Somers, instead of subsiding into the slumber of a sleepy
and tired man, gradually opened his eyes and waked up. Slowly rising into
a sitting posture, he looked around him; and apparently, as if entirely
by accident, he discerned Tom.

"Can't yer sleep?" asked Tom, with extraordinary good nature for a person
of his saturnine disposition.

"I've been asleep these two hours, I believe," gaped Somers. "What time
is it, Tom?"

"'Tain't eight o'clock yet. Yer hain't been asleep more'n fifteen
minutes."

"Haven't I?"

"Not more'n that. Better lay down, and finish yer nap; kase I s'pose yer
won't git much sleep to-night, if ye're gwine over the river."

"I feel better than I did, at any rate. I think I'll get up. It's
tremendous hot here. Don't you ever open your windows?"

"I reckon we do. I was just thinkin' o' that."

And it was quite probable he was thinking of it; for he certainly wanted
the earliest information of the approach of the soldiers. He opened the
window in the front of the house, and Somers opened that in the rear. The
latter then went to the door, and took a careful survey of the entry, in
order to determine the way which the deserter must take to reach the
cellar, where he was to conceal himself when the soldiers came. The
prudent son of the master of the house had opened the door leading to the
cellar, from which he was to enter his subterranean retreat.

For more than an hour, Tom nervously watched the wakeful Yankee, and
several times suggested to him that he could sleep just as well as not,
promising to wake him up if there was any danger; but Somers was most
provokingly lively for a man who had been up all the preceding night, and
resolutely refused to take a hint or to adopt a suggestion. Both of them
were fearfully anxious for the result that was pending, and each had his
plan for overreaching the other. It was a long hour; but at last Tom
broke the spell which seemed to rest on both of them by declaring that he
was "clean choked up," and must go and get a drink of water. At the same
moment, Somers heard the tramp of the soldiers in the road as they
approached the house, and understood why his companion had suddenly
become so thirsty.

"No," said Somers, placing himself between the deserter and the door,
with the revolver in his hand. "I don't want to be left alone. Somebody
is coming to the house--half a dozen men. They are soldiers!" he
exclaimed, glancing out at the window.

"Run right up chimley thar, and you'll be as safe as if you was t'other
side of the river."

"But they'll catch you too! Come, Tom, up chimney with you, and I'll
follow. If any one attempts to follow us, I'll shoot him with my pistol.
Be in a hurry, Tom! We have no time to spare," urged Somers, driving the
coward before him towards the fire-place.

"You go up fust," pleaded Tom, in mortal terror of the revolver.

"Up with you, or I'll blow your brains out!" added Somers in a low,
fierce tone, which frightened his companion half out of his wits.

"Don't fire, and I will," replied the wretch, as he stepped into the
fire-place, and commenced the ascent of the chimney.

"Up with you!" repeated Somers. "Now, if you attempt to come down, I'll
shoot you."

The voice of the farmer, leading the soldiers to their prey, was now
heard close to the house; and Somers deemed it prudent no longer to
remain in the room. Darting out into the entry, he made his way to the
cellar, closing the door behind him just as the rebels were about to
enter.

"Where is he?" demanded the sergeant, who belonged to the battery at the
works near the house.

"In this room," replied the farmer, putting his hand on the door of the
apartment where he had seen the victim lie down to sleep an hour before.
"But yer must be keerful with him. He had a pistol, and mebbe he mought
shoot some on us."

"We aren't afraid of all the Yankees this side of the north pole," added
the sergeant, as he pushed the door open and entered the room, followed
by his squad of soldiers. "Where is he? There aren't no Yankee here."

"Well, he was here an hour ago," said the farmer.

"See here, old man, if you've been makin' a fool of us this hot day, I'll
spit you on my bayonet. We heard that a deserter and a Yankee had been
taken, and that the cavalry lost one of them."

"That was the Yankee. They lost him, and I found him ag'in."

"Where is he, then?"

"He aren't far from here," said the farmer, walking up to the fire-place,
and pointing up the chimney, where he had no doubt the victim had retired
when he heard the soldiers approaching.

"Up there?"

"That's where the feller hid when the troopers was lookin' fur him; and
yer kin be sure he's up there now. But yer must be keerful; fur he's got
a pistol, and is a mighty savage fellow."

"We'll soon bring him down," added the sergeant as he stepped into the
fire-place, and looked up the chimney. "I see him; but he's half way up
to the top. I reckon we can smoke him out best. Come, old man, take some
of this pitch-wood, that will make a big smoke, and kindle a fire."

"We'll soon have him," said the farmer as he obeyed the order.

"I say, Yank!" shouted the sergeant up the chimney; "if you don't want to
be smoked out, come down."

No answer came to this polite suggestion; and then one of the soldiers
proposed to fire his musket up the chimney; which so terrified the
occupant thereof, that he begged for mercy.

"Don't shoot, and I'll come down!" groaned the wretch.

"The cowardly Yank! He's like all the rest of them. Come down quick,
then!"

The farmer, who had stepped out for more wood, returned; and at the same
moment, Tom the deserter, begrimed with soot, dropped down on the hearth,
and stepped out into the room.


CHAPTER XXV

SOMERS IS COMPELLED TO BACK OUT


Very likely the Virginia farmer had some idea of retributive justice when
he saw his hopeful son step out of the fire-place into the very jaws of
ruin. To say that he was astonished would be expressing his state of mind
too tamely; for he was overwhelmed with confusion, fear and mortification.
He had expected to find the Yankee asleep on the floor; but, as he was not
there, it was sufficiently evident to him that he had again resorted to
the chimney for concealment. It had been distinctly arranged beforehand,
that Tom, his son, should conceal himself in the cellar; and, of course,
he did not expect to find him in the chimney.

In short, all his expectations had been defeated, and he himself had
opened the trap for his son to enter. He probably knew how strict was the
discipline of the rebel army in respect to deserters. He had frequently
heard of executions of persons of this class; and he could hardly expect
his son to escape the penalty of his misconduct. He had broken his
bargain with the fugitive; and, in attempting to surrender him to his
implacable enemies, he had deprived his heir of liberty, if not of life.

"This is your Yankee, is it?" demanded the sergeant, as he gazed at the
remnants of the rebel uniform which Tom still wore.

"No, no; this ain't the Yankee!" stammered the farmer.

"Well, you needn't tell us who he is; for we know. I was told to keep a
sharp lookout for one Tom Rigney, a deserter; and I reckon this is the
chap. You are my prisoner, my fine lad."

"There, now, dad!--d'ye see what ye've done?" snarled poor Tom Rigney, as
he glanced reproachfully at the patriarch, who had unwittingly sprung the
trap upon him.

"I didn't do it, Tom," replied Farmer Rigney, appalled at the calamity
which had overtaken his house.

"Didn't you bring me in here to capture this boy?" asked the sergeant,
who appeared to be bewildered by the unnatural act of the father.

"I brought yer here to take the Yank, who was as sassy as a four-year-old
colt."

"He promised the Yankee he'd take keer on him till night," added the
vengeful Tom.

"That was only to keep him here till I could fotch somebody to take keer
on him," pleaded the farmer. "The Yank must be up chimley now," he
continued, reminded that his own reputation for loyalty to the great and
general Southern Confederacy was now doubly compromised.

"He ain't up there, dad, nohow," said Tom.

"Where is he?" demanded the sergeant.

"Dunno."

"Where did he go?"

"Dunno."

"Didn't you see him?"

"I reckon it was too dark, up chimley, to see anything."

"Haven't you seen him?"

"I reckon I have. He woked up, and druv me up chimley right smart, with
the pistol in his hand; reckon, if I hadn't gone, I'd been a dead man;
I'll be dog scotched if I shouldn't."

"You say he drove you up the chimney?" demanded the sergeant.

"I reckon he did."

"Where did he go, then?"

"Dunno."

"Yes, you do know! If you don't tell, you'll get a bayonet through your
vitals," said the soldier sternly, as he demonstrated with the ugly
weapon he had fixed on his gun before he began to examine the chimney.

"Dunno," replied the deserter sulkily.

"Answer, or take the consequences!"

"Dunno. Jes as lief be stuck with a bagonet as shot by a file of
soldiers," answered Tom, to whom the future looked even more dark than
the present.

"Tell, Tom," pleaded his father.

"Dunno, dad; I was up chimley when he left. Dunno no more'n the dead."

Perhaps the sergeant concluded that Tom's position was a reasonable one,
and that it would not have been possible for him to see, from his dark
retreat, where the Yankee had gone. At any rate, he was saved from
further persecution; and two of the men were ordered to conduct him to
the camp, while the remainder stayed to continue the search for the
fugitive. Farmer Rigney protested and pleaded, and even offered to warm
the palms of the soldier's hands with certain pieces of gold which he had
in the house; but, unfortunately for the patriotic farmer, the sergeant
was above a bribe, and Tom was hurried off to his doom.

A careful search of the house and premises was now instituted; and this
time the farmer was a zealous co-operator with the soldiers; for it was
necessary for him to establish his own loyalty before he could do
anything to save his son from the deserter's fate. The party proceeded
up-stairs first, and carefully examined every closet, and every nook and
corner which could by any possibility contain the form of a man. As
Somers was not up-stairs, of course they did not find him; and we will
not weary our readers by following them in their fruitless search.

Somers went down into the cellar, closing the door after him; and, as he
may be lonesome in his gloomy retreat, we will join him there, though it
was rather a tight place for more than one person. The cellar was dark
when the fugitive made his advent within its somber shades; and, as he
was an utter stranger in the place, he was not a little bewildered by the
awkwardness of the situation. He was in darkness, and wished for light;
at least, for enough to enable him to find the hiding-place of which he
had heard the farmer speak.

This snug retreat, where the deserter had balked his pursuers, was
undoubtedly the cellar drain; though, to Somers, it appeared to be a
Virginia notion to have it long enough to admit the form of a man. Tom
Rigney was a larger person than himself; and the case was hopeful enough,
if he could only find the opening. The cellar contained various boxes,
barrels, firkins and other articles, the mass of which were piled up in
one corner.

Somers followed the wall entirely around, from the pile in the corner,
till he returned to it, without finding what he desired. It was
sufficiently evident, therefore, that the entrance to the drain was under
the boxes and barrels, which had probably been placed over it to ward off
the over-inquisitive gaze of any visitors who might explore the cellar.
Our enterprising hero immediately commenced the work of burrowing beneath
the rubbish, and soon had the happiness of discovering the identical road
by which the original occupant of the place had entered. Before the
opening, he found sufficient space to enable him to readjust the boxes
and barrels, so as to hide his den from the observation of any who might
be disposed to follow him in his subterranean explorations.

The drain was certainly small enough, even for the genteel form of
Captain Thomas Somers; though, as his mustache was quite diminutive in
its proportions, he was able to worry himself along several feet into the
gloomy hole. It was a miserable place in which to spend the day; but,
miserable as it was, he hoped that he should be permitted to remain
there. He was fully conscious of the perils of his situation. He knew
that Tom, in the chimney, must be captured; and it was not probable that
the farmer would let the soldiers depart without examining the house. His
retreat was known to him, and there was not one chance in a hundred for
the hole to be passed by without an examination.

It would be fatal to remain where he was; and, after resting himself from
the fatigue which the exertion of moving in his narrow den induced, he
again pushed forward, cheered by the conclusion that a drain would be a
useless institution without an opening at each end. Indeed, there was a
glimmer of light at some distance before him; and he indulged the hope
that he might work his way out to the blue sky.

He had scarcely resumed his progressive movement, which had to be
accomplished very much after the fashion of a serpent--for the aperture
was too narrow for the regular exercise of his legs and arms--he had
scarcely begun to move before voices in the cellar announced the approach
of the pursuers. A cold sweat seemed to deluge his frame; for the sounds
were like the knell of doom to him. With desperate energy he continued
his serpent march; but it was only to butt his head against the stones of
the drain, where its size was reduced to less than half its proportions
near the cellar.

His farther advance was hopelessly checked; and there was nothing more to
be done but to wait patiently the result of the exciting event. He was
satisfied that his feet were not within eight or ten feet of the cellar;
for, being a progressive young man, he had entered the hole head first.
It was possible, but not probable, that he might escape detection, even
if the opening was examined; and, with what self-possession he could
muster for the occasion, he lay, like the slimy worms beneath him, till
ruin or safety should come.

"I reckon he isn't down here," said the sergeant, after the party had
examined the cellar, and even pulled over some of the boxes and barrels.

"God bless you for a stupid fellow as you are!" thought Somers; for he
was prudent enough not audibly to invoke benedictions, even upon the
heads of his enemies; but the words of the sergeant afforded him a degree
of relief, which no one, who has not burrowed in a drain in the rebel
country, can understand or appreciate.

"I reckon there's a place down in that corner that's big enough to hold a
man; fur my son Tom's been in there," added the farmer.

These words gave Somers another cold sweat; and perhaps he thought it was
a mistake that he had not put a bullet through the patriarch's head when
he had been tempted to do so in the room above. He was a double traitor;
but I think the conscience of our hero was more at rest as it was than it
would have been if he had shot down an unarmed man, even to save himself
from prospective capture.

"Where is the place?" demanded the sergeant.

"In yonder, under them barrels and boxes. Jest fotch the trumpery out,
and you'll see the hole," replied Rigney.

Somers heard the rumble of the barrels, as they were rolled out of the
way, with very much the same feelings that a conscious man in a trance
would listen to the rumbling of the wheels of the hearse which was
bearing him to the church-yard, only that he was to come forth from a
hopeless grave to the more gloomy light of a rebel dungeon.

"I can't see anything in that hole," said the sergeant. "No man could get
into such a place as that."

"Blessed are your eyes; for they see not!" thought Somers. "May your
blindness be equal to that of the scribes and Pharisees!"

"But my son Tom has been in there. I reckon a Yankee could crawl inter as
small a hole as anybody."

The sergeant thought this was funny; and he honored the remark with a
hearty laugh, in which Somers was disposed to join, though he regretted
for the first time in his life that he was unable to "crawl out at the
little end of the horn." He was encouraged by the skepticism of the
soldier, and was satisfied, that, if he attempted to demonstrate the
proposition experimentally, he would be fully convinced of its
difficulty, if not of its impossibility.

"Go and bring another lamp and a pole," said the sergeant.

One of the party went up the stairs, and Somers gave himself up for lost.
The extra lamp would certainly expose him, to say nothing of the pole;
and it seemed to be folly to remain there, and be punched with a stick,
like a woodchuck in his hole. Besides, there is something in tumbling
down gracefully, when one must inevitably tumble; and he was disposed to
surrender gracefully, as the coon did when he learned that Colonel
Crockett was about to fire and bring him down. There was no hope; and it
is bad generalship, as well as inhuman and useless, to fight a battle
which is lost before the first shot is fired.

We have before intimated that Captain Somers, besides being a brave and
enterprising young man, was a philosopher. He had that happy
self-possession which enables one to bear the ills of life, as well as
the courage and address to triumph over them. He had done everything
which ingenuity, skill, and impudence could accomplish to save himself
from the hands of the rebel soldiers; from a rebel prison, if not from a
rebel halter. He had failed; and, though it gave him a bitter pang to
yield his last hope, he believed that nothing better could be done than
to surrender with good grace.

"How are you, sergeant?" shouted he, when he had fully resolved upon his
next step.

"Hallo!" replied the sergeant, laughing heartily at the hail from the
bowels of the earth. "How are you, Yank?"

"In a tight place, sergeant; and I've concluded to back out," replied
Somers.

"Good! That's what all the Yankees will have to do before they grow much
older. Back out, Yank!"

Somers commenced the operation, which was an exceedingly unpleasant
necessity to a person of his progressive temperament. It was a slow
maneuver; but the sergeant waited patiently till it was accomplished, by
which time the extra lamp and the pole had reported for duty.

"How are you, Yank?" said the sergeant, laughing immoderately at the
misfortune of his victim.

"That's the smallest hole I ever attempted to crawl through," replied
Somers, puffing and blowing from the violence of his exertions in
releasing himself from his narrow prison-house.

"How came you in such a place?" asked the sergeant as they walked up the
stairs.

"Well, my friend, the farmer here, suggested the idea to me. He said his
son had crawled in there a great many times."

"I?" exclaimed Rigney. "I never said a word about the drean."

"You must be looked after," added the sergeant, with a menacing look at
the discomfited farmer. "You have concealed a deserter in your house for
weeks; and now we find that you hide Yankees too."

"I didn't hide him!" protested Rigney.

"Didn't you agree to keep me here till night?" asked Somers, who despised
him beyond expression.

"If I did, it was only to have the soldiers ketch yer."

The sergeant declared that Rigney was a traitor, and that he must go
along with him; but Somers, with more magnanimity than many men would
have exercised towards such a faithless wretch, told the whole story
exactly as it was, thus relieving him of a portion of his infidelity to
the Southern Confederacy; and the sergeant was graciously pleased to let
him remain at home, while his victim was marched off to the rebel camp.


CHAPTER XXVI

A NIGHT IN PETERSBURG


The sergeant who had captured our hero seemed to be a very clever fellow,
and appreciated the sterling merits of his captive. While he was rigidly
devoted to the discharge of his duty, he treated his prisoner with all
the consideration which one human being has the right to expect of
another, whatever the circumstances under which they meet.

Somers was disgusted with the result of the adventure, even while he had
no reason to blame himself for any want of care or skill in conducting
his affairs under the trying circumstances. He was only a few hours
behind his late companion, Captain de Banyan; whom he had now a
reasonable expectation of meeting again before the close of the day.

If Somers was disgusted with the issue of the adventure, he did not yet
despair of effecting his escape. This was all he had to live for at
present; and he was determined not to lose sight of this great object of
existence. Libby Prison was a flourishing institution, even at the time
of which we write; and he was determined not to be sent there, if human
energy and perseverance could save him from such a fate. It was easier to
avoid such a trap than it would be to get out of it after he had fallen
into it. As he walked along with the talkative sergeant, he kept his eyes
open, ready to avail himself of any opportunity which might afford him a
reasonable prospect of shaking off his disagreeable companion.

His captor asked him a great many questions in regard to himself, and to
the Army of the Potomac on the other side of the river, which Somers
answered with skill and discretion; though we suppose that even a rigid
moralist would have excused some slight variations from the strict letter
of the truth which crept into his replies. He was an officer in the
Yankee army; but he dared not acknowledge his rank, lest he should be
accused of being a spy. If he was a captain, he ought to have worn the
uniform of his rank in order to have it recognized. As he was a private,
his chance of spending the summer on Belle Isle was better than that for
Libby. But, as Somers was fully resolved not to go to Richmond in advance
of the noble army whose fortunes and misfortunes he had shared, he did
not deem it necessary to consider what quarters he should occupy.

The sergeant was a faithful soldier. Somers found no opportunity to slip
away from his guard on the way to the camp. He was duly delivered to the
officer of the day, and his intimacy with his good-natured captor was at
an end. The officer who was responsible for him made some inquiries in
regard to the prisoner, and learned that he had escaped from the troopers
in the morning. When he understood the case, as it was only eight miles
to the railroad station, where the other prisoner was probably waiting a
conveyance in the camp, he decided to send Somers forward at once,
fearful that he might again take leave of his captors. From what he had
heard from Captain Osborn and the cavalry soldiers in charge of him, he
concluded that the young man was a person of more consequence than he
appeared to be--that he was either high in rank, or guilty of enormous
military misdemeanors.

A two-horse wagon used for general business about the camp was brought
up, and Somers was sent forward in charge of two soldiers, who were
especially ordered to shoot him if he attempted to escape; which they
would probably have done of their own free will and accord, without any
orders. The captive looked in vain for an opportunity to elude the
vigilance of the guard; they hardly took their eyes off him during the
ride. Possibly they thought the young fellow was President Lincoln in
disguise, and that the salvation of the Southern Confederacy depended
upon his safe delivery into the hands of the provost-marshal at Richmond.

The roads were very muddy from the recent rains, and it required two
hours to accomplish the distance to the railroad station. On their
arrival, Somers was handed over to another officer in charge of the camp
at the station. Captain de Banyan had already been sent forward to
Petersburg, and another train would not depart till evening. Somers was
carefully guarded during the remainder of the day, and an attempt to get
away would have been equivalent to committing suicide. At dark he was put
into a baggage-car, with two soldiers to guard him; and in a short time
reached the city of Petersburg. With several other unfortunate Union
soldiers, he was placed in a small room in the station-house, to remain
until a train should start for Richmond. Of course, they were carefully
guarded; and Somers began to fear that he should, after all, be compelled
to visit the rebel capital without the army.

The room was on the second floor, with two windows opening into the
street; but the prisoners were charged, on penalty of being shot, not to
look out at them. There was not the ghost of a chance to operate under
such unfavorable circumstances; and Somers gave up all thoughts of doing
anything that night. Stretching himself on the floor, he tried to sleep;
but his spirit was too great to permit him calmly to view the prospect of
a rebel prison. As he lay on the floor, he ransacked his brain for some
expedient which would save him from the horrors of Libby or Belle Isle.

The best scheme that suggested itself was to leap from the cars on the
way to Richmond. It involved the liability to a broken neck or a broken
limb; but he determined to watch for an opportunity to execute this
reckless purpose. His companions in bondage were worn out with long
marches, and all of them slept on the floor around him in a few moments
after they entered the room. They had asked him some questions; but he
kept his own counsel, and endeavored to cheer their desponding spirits
with the hope of being soon exchanged.

At last Somers went to sleep himself, after he had heard a church clock
in the city strike eleven. He had slept none on the preceding night, and
his slumbers were as sound as if he had been in his attic-chamber in the
cottage at Pinchbrook. Even the opening of the door, and the entrance of
three men with a lantern, did not disturb him. One of the party was an
officer. He wore a military cloak over the gray uniform of the
Confederate army.

"Which is the man?" demanded he in sharp tones of the two soldiers who
accompanied him.

"I don't know which he is now," replied the corporal of the guard.
"What's his name?"

"Tom Leathers," answered the officer.

The corporal then passed round among the sleeping prisoners, and roughly
kicked those who were asleep, including Somers, who sprang to his feet,
and was rather disposed to make a "row" on account of this rude
treatment, before he remembered where he was.

"Now they are all awake," said the corporal when he had been the rounds.
"Is there any such man as Tom Leathers here?"

"Tom Leathers," repeated the officer in a loud tone.

No one answered to the name; but, in a moment, Somers happened to think
that this was the appellative which he had assumed when he was a pilot
down on the creek by the James River. He was evidently the person
intended; but he was in doubt whether to answer the summons. The
antecedents of the young pilot of the James were not such as to entitle
him to much consideration at the hands of the rebels; and he was disposed
to deny his identity. While he was debating the question in his own mind,
the corporal repeated the name.

"There's no such man here," he added, turning to the officer.

"He must be here. He came up in the night train."

"He don't answer to his name."

"Hold your lantern, and let me look these prisoners in the face."

The corporal passed from one to another of the captives till he came to
Somers; thrusting the lantern into the face of each, so that the officer
could scan his features.

"What's your name?" he asked, as the corporal placed the lantern before
Somers.

Not having made up his mind as to the effect of acknowledging his
identity with the pilot, he made no reply.

"That's the man," said the officer decidedly.

"Is your name Tom Leathers?" added the corporal, as he made a
demonstration with his bayonet at the prisoner.

"Put down your musket, corporal; you needn't be a brute to your
prisoners."

"I only wanted to make him answer the question. If you give me leave,
I'll find a tongue for him."

"He is the man I want; bring him out," replied the officer.

"Bring him out? I beg your pardon, sir; but I don't know who you are. I
can't give up a prisoner without orders."

The officer, who seemed to be suffering with a bad cold, and wore the
collar of his cloak turned up so as to conceal the greater part of his
face, opened the lower part of his garment, so that the corporal could
see his uniform. At the same time he took from his pocket a paper, which
he opened, and handed to the guard.

"That's all right," said the latter, when he had read the document. "Of
course, you will leave this with me?"

"Certainly. Now bring out the man; and lose no time, for I am in a
hurry."

Somers was conducted from the room to the car-house below, where the
officer asked for a soldier to guard the prisoner to the office of the
provost-marshal, who was waiting for him. The corporal furnished the man;
and the captive walked off between his two companions, bewildered by the
sudden change which had taken place in the course of events. He could not
imagine why he had been singled out from the rest of the prisoners in the
station-house, unless some specific and more definite charge than being
in arms against the great Southern Confederacy had been laid at his door.
The most unpleasant thought that came to his mind was that Captain de
Banyan had betrayed the object of his mission to the south side of the
river. There was good evidence that his fellow-officer had come over as a
spy; and the hope of saving his own life might have induced him to
sacrifice even one who had been his best friend.

It was not pleasant to think of Captain de Banyan as capable of doing so
mean an act; for he had been regarded in the regiment as the soul of
honor,--of worldly honor, which scorns to do a vile thing if public
opinion has condemned it. But the astounding information which he had
obtained among the rebels concerning his friend's antecedents had
destroyed his confidence in him, and he was prepared for anything from
him. In this light, his situation was almost hopeless; for the evidence
would certainly condemn him before any court-martial in the Confederacy,
and the chances of escape were lessened by his separation from his
unfortunate companions in arms. He had probably been taken away from them
to prevent even the possibility of exercising his talent in getting away,
as he had done after his capture.

They walked in silence along the gloomy and deserted streets; and Somers
felt just as if he were marching to his execution. He knew that the rebel
officers had a summary way of dealing with cases like his own; and he was
prepared to be condemned, even before another sun rose to gladden him
with his cheerful light. He thought of his mother, of his father, of the
other members of the family, and of the blow it would be to them to learn
that he had been hanged as a spy. He thought of Pinchbrook, of the happy
days he had spent there, and of those who had been his true friends. He
thought of Lilian Ashford, the beautiful one, in the remembrance of whose
sweet smile he had reveled every day since they parted, and which he had
hoped to enjoy again when war should no more desolate the land, and he
should be proudly enrolled with the heroes who had saved the nation from
ruin.

All these pleasant memories, all these bright hopes, all these loving
forms, though present in his heart, seemed dim and distant to him. He had
nothing to hope for in the future on this side of the grave, nothing in
the present but an ignominious death on the scaffold. Yet it was sweet to
die for one's country; and, disgraceful as his end might be in its form,
it was still in the service of the nation. He felt happy in the thought;
and, if there was nothing more on earth to hope for, there was still a
bright heaven beyond the deepest and darkest grave into which the hate of
traitors could plunge him, where the ruptured ties of this life are again
restored, never again to be subject to change and decay.

There was a tear in his eye as he thought of his fond mother; and he wept
for her when he could not weep for himself. No one saw that tear, and the
officer permitted him to indulge his sad revery in silence. But, after
they had walked two or three squares, his companion in authority suddenly
stopped.

"I have left a book, which I carried in my hand, at the depot," said he,
in tones full of chagrin at his carelessness. "I must have it; for I can
do nothing without it."

"Where did you leave it?" asked the soldier.

"In the guard-room. You may go back, and bring it to me. Give me your
gun; you needn't carry that."

"Where shall I find you?"

"Here, where you leave me. Go quick, my man."

"I won't be gone ten minutes," replied the soldier, as he started off at
a run for the missing volume.

The officer took the gun, and stood by the side of his prisoner, at the
corner of the street, till the soldier disappeared in the darkness.
Somers, still thinking of the sad fate which he was confident was in
store for him, wished to confirm his impressions in regard to his
destiny. His companion seemed to be a gentleman of a kindly nature,
though stern in the discharge of his duty. It was possible that he would
give him some information in regard to the probable disposal of him.

"Will you tell me, sir, why I am separated from the rest of the
prisoners?" said he, as soon as the sentinel had departed upon his
errand.

"Because you are an officer."

"How do you know I am?" asked Somers, very desirous of ascertaining how
much Captain de Banyan had told in regard to him.

"We know all about you," answered the officer, muffling his cloak more
closely around his face, as if afraid the night air might injure his
lungs as he opened his mouth.

"What do you know about me?"

"All about you."

"That isn't very definite."

"In a word, you are Captain Thomas Somers, of the --th regiment."

"Who told you that?"

"That's of no consequence."

"What is to be done with me?"

"I don't know."

"I suppose I am only a prisoner of war?"

"You crossed the James River in disguise, and went into our lines for the
purpose of obtaining information. I suppose you can put those two things
together."

Somers's worst fears were confirmed. He was to be tried as a spy, and De
Banyan had told all he knew about him. Before he had time to dwell on the
dark prospect any longer, the officer said he was cold, and could not
stand there any longer. Taking his prisoner by the arm, he led him down
the cross-street. Somers was just thinking of an attempt to bid his
companion good-night, when the latter spoke again:

"I shall catch my death from this night air," said he. "Just before the
battle of Magenta----"

"Captain de Banyan!" exclaimed Somers.


CHAPTER XXVII

A FRIEND INDEED


"Hush, my dear boy! not a word!" said Captain de Banyan in an impressive
whisper, as he led the way along the street.

Somers made no reply; for he readily perceived that the utmost caution
was necessary, though he did not understand the position of his friend,
or what complications there were in the situation. He was filled with
rejoicing at finding himself again in the way of getting back to the
Union army. Of course, his feelings towards Captain de Banyan, in spite
of his antecedents in the Third Tennessee, underwent a sudden and
agreeable change; and in the joy of his heart he was disposed to embrace
his friend, and beg forgiveness for the suspicions he had entertained of
him.

They had advanced but a short distance from the main street, when they
heard the clatter of horses' hoofs.

"That's bad," said Captain de Banyan, as he stopped to ascertain in what
direction the horsemen were going.

"What's bad?" demanded Somers.

"My absence has been discovered, I am afraid. The provost-marshal has a
section of cavalry to run down Union prisoners who may escape. I think
they are after me; at any rate, we must be very careful where we go."

A few moments later, a small party of horsemen dashed down the street by
which the captain was conducting his retreat. It would prove fatal to
their hopes, if they were seen; and Captain de Banyan entered the yard of
a house, followed by his companion. There was a stable on the premises;
and, without a special invitation from the owner, they entered, making
their way to the hay-loft, which seemed to be the most promising place of
concealment. A horse in the stall below whinnied when they reached the
second floor, expecting, no doubt, his morning rations of hay.

Unfortunately for the fugitives, still more unfortunately perhaps for the
horse, there was very little hay in the loft; so that a secure
hiding-place was not readily found. But, as it was no part of the
captain's intention to remain long in this loft, they seated themselves
on a grain chest, to wait till the troopers should pass the house.

"What time is it, captain?" asked Somers.

"About four in the morning. We are rather late. It will be daylight in
about an hour."

"Where have you been since we parted?"

"Since we parted, my boy? We didn't part. You did all the parting,
Somers," replied De Banyan in a reproachful tone.

"I know I did; but, after what I had heard, you need scarcely wonder. You
acknowledged that you had been a rebel officer, and a member of the Third
Tennessee regiment."

"I grant it; but I thought enough else was said to enable you to
understand my position."

"Well, I had some hopes that you were all right; but I could not banish
my fears. How could I know that you had not been sent over on the other
side for the same purpose that we crossed the James?"

"You might have known it, my dear fellow. They don't usually send men
over on such business whose loyalty is doubtful. You heard the captain
say that I had been suspected."

"I did; but I could not fully understand your position."

"And so you gave me the slip? Well, Somers, I forgive you."

"I am sure, if I had not been in doubt in regard to what you were, I
would not have left you, even if I had been certain of hanging with you."

"I know you wouldn't, my boy. I confess there were a great many dark
things against me; but I assure you I am a loyal and true man. I have
suffered more for the Union than you have; for I was born in the sunny
South, and all my friends and neighbors went with the rebels. I had no
alternative but to go into the army, where my experience in the Crimea,
in Italy, and in Mexico, made me an officer. I escaped as soon as I
could, and enrolled myself on the right side."

Somers grasped the hand of his brave and devoted companion, which he
pressed with a warmth that indicated his feelings more eloquently than
words could have done. He was entirely satisfied with the explanation,
because it was fully sustained by the conduct of the captain, and by the
words of the rebel cavalry officer who had claimed his acquaintance. He
was even disposed to believe that De Banyan had been a soldier in the
European wars and in Mexico; which was a degree of credulity hardly to be
expected of a sensible young man.

"You will forgive me for my unjust suspicions, captain? I assure you it
went against my grain to believe that you were a rebel."

"You had good reason for it. I was more afraid of you, when I confessed
my sins to the rebel officer, than I was of him. We are friends again,
Somers; that's all I want."

"You have proved yourself my friend by this last act; and I should have
needed no further explanation to convince me that you were a loyal man."

"I am all that, my dear boy."

"Where have you been since I parted from you?"

"I got up to Petersburg in the afternoon. I was put in that hole where I
found you at first; but, when the provost-marshal learned my story, he
sent for me, and I was conducted to his office. Just as I came out of the
depot, you went in. He wanted to question me, he said. Well, I happened
to know him, though he did not know me. I knew his weak point; and, in a
word, I bamboozled him. The same answer that he himself worked in a
Offizin in which the tariff was approved, he therefore also of the whole
affair is. He advised me to introduce myself to the Tariff Commission.
On Tuesday afternoon I took with this consultation and was pleased with
the willingness with which my proposal entgegenkam.

They called me and some of the principals in which I should first ask
whether it was this side inclined to show a placement. These were
the men Giesecke & Devrient and Ackermann (Company Teubner).
Yesterday I went to the latter. Devrient was traveling, Giesecke not
here, and Ackermann, I was at the decision that I am best at Stadtrat
Härtel (Company Breitkopf & Härtel) or Brockhaus turn, because they were
chairman of the cooperative. I must note here that I am deliberately
not to the latter had turned, and from the fact, because the same
as the fiercest opponent of the workers are known.

Nevertheless, I was after this statement leads, Härtel yet to go. I met
both brothers at home and had a fairly permanent one hours entertainment
with them, whose final result was that the principals do not step to an
understanding would do more after the price of Commission typesetter
compared to the mediation attempts of the Privy Professor v. guard so
unaccommodating showed. I replied that since that time (fourteen days),
the views seemed to have changed and from that page to an understanding
readily shortly.

But these and similar statements from my side in vain. I noticed very
clearly from the statements of these gentlemen, that the Tariff
Commission to the uttermost is fierce, and an understanding not
just wanted.

So it was, inter alia, the assertion that this Commission has no mandate,
called the typesetter to act, but they had appropriated the same. An
assertion that the facts are against the very odd excluded.

Then you said again: what it availed, if the Commission is also an
agreement reached with the principals and now the other but did
not want.

About principal had no reason to another agency, since the said
Privy Professor v. guard still termination of negotiations have
already explained, each time the same again, and if the workers
with the proposal was really serious, they are steps want.

After I saw this statement, however, how little success further negotiations
would have, and removed me.

I got into
the street, and went to the depot. There I told the corporal of the guard
a very interesting story about the prisoner who had been brought up in
the afternoon, meaning myself; and that the man I wanted was needed
immediately as a witness. You know the rest, my dear fellow; and here we
are."

"And here we are likely to remain, I'm afraid," added Somers.

"Not a bit of it. I haven't exhausted half my expedients yet. On the
night before the attack on the Redan, at Sebastopol, I went all over that
city, and spent the evening at the house of one of the most distinguished
citizens--a gentleman who had a government contract for rations. Of
course, he didn't know me."

"Hush! There is some one coming into the stable below," said Somers, as
he heard a door opened on the floor below.

It was impossible to move then without making noise enough to excite the
attention of the person who had entered; for the stable was old and
rickety, and the boards creaked at every step they took. The fugitives
listened with breathless interest to the movements of the unwelcome
visitor. The horse whinnied again; and the person entered the stall, and
spoke to him. The sound of his voice filled the occupants of the loft
with consternation; for evidently the speaker was not a negro servant, as
they had hoped and expected to find him, but a white man, and one who
used the English language well.

"Come, Jenny, there's a job on hand for us; and you must postpone your
breakfast till we catch the Yankee prisoners," said the person, who, the
fugitives were now satisfied, was an officer of the cavalry service.

While De Banyan was telling his story, they had heard some noise at the
house; and they now concluded that the party which had ridden up the
street had come to call this officer for duty. They hoped that nothing
would require him to pay a visit to the loft, and that, like a good
officer, he would be as expeditious as possible in his preparations.

"You are my prisoner, if he comes up-stairs," whispered De Banyan.

Somers pressed the hand of his companion to assure him that he understood
his plan; and they held their breath, in the intense anxiety of the
moment, for further developments. The present seemed to be the turning
point in the career of the adventurers; and, if they could once escape
from the horns of this dilemma, skill and prudence would conduct them in
safety to the Union lines.

The officer below, after he had politely informed "Jenny" of the early
movement, seemed to be in no hurry to get into the saddle. He went out at
the door of the stable, and all was silent again, except the voice of
Jenny, who seemed to be protesting against any movement before she had
received her customary feed of corn.

"Peters!" shouted the officer from the door, "hurry up! The Yankees will
get to the James River before you get the saddle on my horse. Where have
you been?"

"I was looking for my boots."

"An orderly ought to wear his boots to bed with him, if he can't put them
where he can find them," replied the officer, as the heavy step of
another man was heard in the stable below.

"What news did you hear?" asked the officer, as the orderly led the horse
from the stall.

"The sergeant said some officer that had been took as a deserter done
runned away," replied Peters, as the fugitives heard the rattle of the
saddle-gear.

"Hurry up, then!"

"He done took a Yankee prisoner from the depot with him," added Peters,
who, if he had not been called an orderly, the listeners would have taken
for a negro.

"You may take a peck of corn in a bag for Jenny, Peters. We may have a
long ride of it," added the officer, as he left the stable.

A peck of corn! De Banyan and Somers were sitting on the grain chest! It
was impossible to avoid discovery; and De Banyan threw off his cloak,
ready for the emergency.

"Somers, my boy, we must change our tactics. They have heard the whole
story, and we can't blind them. We must make the best of it. Have you a
pistol?" whispered the captain.

"No; all I had was taken from me," replied Somers.

"I have only one. No matter; it would never do to fire up here," added De
Banyan, as he picked up a short pitch-fork which lay near him.

"Are you going to kill him?" asked Somers.

"It's life or death for you and me! We can't stop for trifles," answered
the captain in hurried tones, but still in a whisper.

They listened for a moment longer to the quick movements of Peters in the
stable below. It was evident that Jenny was duly caparisoned for service;
and then another horse was led out, which belonged to the orderly. He was
prepared for service in less time than Jenny had required; and, a moment
later, the step of Peters was heard on the stairs. With the bag in his
hand, he was coming up for the corn, as he had been ordered by the
officer. He did not see the fugitives till he had reached the last step;
when, as he was on the point of opening his mouth to speak, De Banyan
leveled a blow at his head with the handle of the pitch-fork, which
felled him to the floor.

He sank down upon the stairs stunned or dead; and the captain, as though
he had carefully matured his plan beforehand, dragged the body to one
corner of the loft, where he covered it with hay.

"Not a word, Somers," said he in an excited whisper, as he crouched down
behind the grain chest.

"Are you going to stay here?" demanded Somers, astonished at this
singular disposition of the forces.

"Hush--the officer is close by."

With beating heart, Somers waited for the further action of his resolute
companion. It was the most critical period of his life, it seemed to him,
especially as he did not fully comprehend the purpose of De Banyan. Only
a moment elapsed, but it was long enough to be a week, before the owner
of Jenny returned to the stable.

"Peters! What are you about?" shouted he angrily. "I shall never get off
at this rate. Peters!"

Peters was not in condition to answer the summons at that moment. Somers
hoped he was not dead; but he might as well have been dead, so far as
speaking was concerned.

"Peters!" shouted the officer again, with a string of Southern
Confederacy oaths; "where are you? What are you about?"

Of course, the orderly could not answer; and his silence only added to
the rage of his master, who continued to swear in a manner which must
have disgusted the gentle Jenny, and the other respectable horse standing
on the stable-floor.

The officer rushed out of the stable, and the heaviness of his step
indicated the state of his mind. He had gone to look for Peters; but, as
Peters was not outside, he must be inside; and the officer entered again.
He now walked towards the stairs leading to the loft.

"Peters!" he continued to roar as he rushed up the stairs. "Peters! this
is your last day's service with me!"

But the poor orderly was unable to remove the stain which rested upon his
fidelity. He still held his peace; still silently submitted to the unjust
imputations on his character. The officer landed in the loft just as
Captain de Banyan rose to receive him.

"Who are you?" demanded he, as the stout form of the captain confronted
him.

"Your most obedient servant to command," replied De Banyan.

"You are a Confederate officer?"

"I seem to be; but I am not. Be that as it may, your presence is
dangerous to my health and comfort."

"I see: you are the deserter."

"I am; but the future lies between you and me."

"Then we will let the future speak for itself," answered the officer,
drawing a pistol from his belt. "Surrender, or you are a dead man!"

"I must positively decline the honor," replied De Banyan, as he swung the
pitch-fork over his head, and attempted to strike him down.

He failed; and the officer fired, but without effect. At that moment,
Somers stepped forward with a billet of wood he found on the floor. At
the same time, De Banyan raised the pistol; but the rebel fired a second
time before he could discharge it. Somers instantly dropped his stick,
and his left arm fell to his side; the ball had passed through it. De
Banyan fired; the officer sank down, not killed, but badly wounded.


CHAPTER XXVIII

DR. SCOVILLE'S PATIENT


The ball from De Banyan's pistol had passed through the right side of the
officer; and he sank upon the floor, the blood flowing copiously from the
wound. These proceedings were so irregular, that Somers could not
reconcile himself to them. He was wounded himself; but, when the officer
fell, he was full of sympathy for him. It was evident that the sufferer
would bleed to death in a short time, if left to himself without any
attention; and Somers could not endure the thought of letting even an
enemy die in this forsaken condition.

"Come, my boy; we have no time to lose. It's daylight now, and we ought
to be five miles from the city before this time," said De Banyan, as he
moved towards the stairs. "Take the man's pistol and ammunition, and come
along as fast as you can."

"Will you leave this gentleman in this condition?" asked Somers, gazing
with pitying tenderness at the pale face of the fallen officer.

"Leave him? Of course; we can't take him with us."

"But he will bleed to death if we leave him here."

"Let him bleed to death; I can't help that. Many a better man than he has
bled to death since this war began. Come along, Somers! What is the
matter with your arm?" demanded he, when he saw that it hung useless at
his side.

"I was hit."

"Hit! We are lost, then!"

"No, we are not lost, either. I am not killed," replied Somers, whose arm
was still numb from the effect of the shot.

"That's a misfortune. I am afraid it will spoil everything. Can you sit
on a horse?"

"Of course I can. But I can't bear to let this man die here alone. He is
a brave fellow, and deserves a better fate."

"Come along, Somers! You are an odd stick, when you are wounded, to
trouble yourself about your enemies. Let me see your arm."

The captain examined the wounded member, which was now bleeding very
freely. He tied a handkerchief around the arm, and did the best which the
circumstances would admit for his friend. He then led the way
down-stairs, where the horses were impatiently waiting for their riders.
Jenny was a noble mare, and the orderly's horse was an excellent animal.
De Banyan, knowing how much might depend upon the endurance of the horses
in the flight before them, filled the bag with corn in the loft, after he
had helped Somers to mount the horse of Peters, which appeared to be the
steadier beast of the two.

The noise of the affray in the loft had probably been heard by some of
the occupants of the house; and, just as the fugitives had mounted the
horses, a black woman from the dwelling approached the stable. Diaper band
found their greatest and most effective systems in Heinrich Rickert,
as his most important pupils, but also in some sense already
overcomers in the war on the German philosophy Leide fallen forward
of Emil Lask must apply.

We must make quick time; for we shall have the
whole city after us in ten minutes," said De Banyan, as he urged Jenny to
the top of her speed.

The spirited animal seemed as willing to exert herself for the enemies as
the friends of the Southern Confederacy; thus proving that she was a
neutral horse, or cherished Union sentiments. But the other horse could
not keep pace with her, and De Banyan was compelled to restrain her
speed. The fugitives had scarcely appeared in the street before a hue and
cry was raised; for the place had been thoroughly aroused by the clamor
which the troopers had created. Still, there was nothing in sight which
promised to offer any serious resistance to their progress.

A few moments brought them to the outskirts of the town; though in what
direction, or to what point, the road they had taken would lead them,
neither De Banyan nor Somers had the most remote idea. To go in the wrong
direction was equivalent to plunging into certain ruin; to go in any
direction was hardly less perilous; for the rebel cavalry was out upon
every road, intent upon capturing the deserter and the Yankee. As they
emerged from the more thickly settled parts of the city, they discovered
a negro approaching them.

"Where does this road lead to?" demanded De Banyan, reining in his fiery
steed.

"Prince George's Court House, massa," replied the man. "Wha' for you
gwine down dar?"

De Banyan was not disposed to answer any unnecessary questions, and again
spurred on his horse.

"See here, massa!" shouted the negro.

"What do you want?" asked De Banyan impatiently; for, being a Southerner
himself, he had no particular respect for the negro race.

"Don't go down dar, massa."

"Why not?"

"Git cotched if you do, massa," said the man with an expressive grin. "De
sodgers on de horses is down dar arter you."

"How do you know they are after us, you black rascal?"

"Kase dey ax dis chile if he see two men, one ob 'em dressed like de
'federate ossifer, and de odder a Yank. Dis nigger didn't see no sich
pussons den; but, golly, sees um now fur sartin. You done git cotched as
shore as you was born, massa, if you go down dar."

"Where shall we go, then?"

"Dunno, massa; but you mustn't be seen gwine down dar."

"How many soldiers did you meet?"

"Four, sar."

"This won't do, Somers. How is your arm?"

"It begins to ache. We may as well go forward as back," said Somers, who
was now suffering severely from his wound, which had not been improved by
the hard gallop of the horse he rode.

"Who lives in that house?" demanded De Banyan of the negro, pointing to a
splendid dwelling a short distance ahead.

"Dr. Scoville, massa."

"Doctor?" replied the captain, glancing at Somers.

"Yes, sar; Dr. Scoville. Dat's a mighty fine mar you rides, massa. I
reckon dat's Captain Sheffield's mar."

"Very likely."

"Don't mind me, massa; dis chile's a Union man for shore," grinned the
negro.

"All the negroes are Union men," replied Somers faintly.

"Dat's so, massa!"

"What's Dr. Scoville?" asked De Banyan hopefully.

"Secesh, massa--drefful secesh. He done been in de army fur a surgeon."

"He is a dangerous man, then."

"Dar, massa, dar!" shouted the negro suddenly, as he pointed down the
road over which the fugitives had just come. "Dey's some more arter you."

De Banyan started his horse again, followed by Somers; but it was evident
from the appearance of the latter that the chase was nearly finished for
him. He was beginning to feel very faint from the loss of blood, while
the pain of his wounded arm was almost unsupportable. The gait of the
horse seemed to wrench the bones asunder, and cause the shattered parts
to grate against each other.

"Hurry up, Somers, my dear boy," said his companion, as he glanced back
at the pale face of his friend.

"I am afraid I can't go much farther, De Banyan," replied Somers. "I am
very faint. I feel sick."

"Cheer up, and make one effort more. The rebels are upon us!"

"I cannot. I shall fall from the horse, I am afraid."

"Don't do that."

"I won't if I can help it; but the motion of the horse almost kills me.
Leave me, De Banyan; save yourself if you can."

"Leave you? I haven't the remotest idea of doing anything of the sort."

"Better go on, and save yourself. It is all up with me."

"A mother would sooner leave her baby than I would leave you," replied De
Banyan in tones as tender as a woman's. "I'll never leave you, Somers. If
you go to Richmond, I shall go with you."

"You cannot do me any good. Save yourself before it is too late."

"Not I."

"I beg you----"

"Cease your blarney, my dear boy! We are one flesh; and we will hang
together to the end of life, or _at_ the end of it, as the case may be.
Here, Somers, stick to your horse a moment more, and we will call and see
the doctor."

"Dr. Scoville!" exclaimed Somers, alarmed at the idea.

"Very likely he is a good surgeon. You are on the sick-list now; mind
what I say, and do just what I tell you."

To include Külpe, H. Schwarz, Brentano, Ehrenfels, Scheler, Driesch,
Austria, cups, Jellinek, star among the representatives of the modern
metaphysics of theistic thought in the direction of how different they
each have their reasons Theismus and personalism. So it is a particular
feature of the current metaphysics, that they are in sharp contrast
to the metaphysics of the classical era (with E. von Hartmann's
confinement) unpantheistisch striking and strong personality is. I have
cited above (see "From the Eternal in Man, Volume 1) shows how the
modern pantheism once through the development of the naturalistic
pantheism akosmistischen (Hegel to modern modernism), and subsequently
by inclusion of new factors in the irrational world ground (
Schelling, Schopenhauer, von Hartmann, Bergson) in increasing self
has decomposed.

Also, it is understandable that in such a chaotic time, and suffering
such as ours of pantheism (basically a harmony-oriented mindset and
final synthetic culture age) no mental tmosph ä A re possesses.

A third tendency of modern metaphysics is the inclusion of the basic
biological questions at the heart of the metaphysical problems and a
certain, in my opinion too strong inclination, particularly the
metaphysical questions about this page here to solve (Bergson, Driesch,
Stern). Besides the problem of God is the modern metaphysics of the
soul issue and the problem of free will have been addressed. Even in the
soul, the question of theistic and antipantheistische view of the
soul as an independent, active substance again larger attachment
(Stern, Driesch, Austria, Külpe, Scheler, cups).

Above all, however, is the profound transformation of the modern
metaphysical thinking in the opinion of leading researchers to the
problem of free will identify. During about ten years ago the numerous
forms of "determinism" in almost exclusive domination, are currently a
large number of important research for the study of the F
reiheitdes human wishing.

It was here called James, Bergson, K.

Joël, which we have a particularly deep book on the issue due
Driesch, H.

Munster mountain, Scheler, N. Alas, in his book "The will and temperament"
with the most has done to the will of experimental-psychological facts to
explain, is also the doctrine of free will close. Under these metaphysics,
which comply with this general direction, is expected to star ,
cups and Driesch the greatest importance.

"Yes, massa," replied one of the women as she hastened to obey the order.

"How do you feel, my dear boy?" said De Banyan, bending over his charge.

But Somers was past answering. He had fainted from loss of blood and the
agony of his wound. The resolute captain did not wait for Dr. Scoville in
this emergency; but, taking a bottle of cologne from the mantel, he
applied himself with skill and vigor to the restoration of his patient.
While he was thus engaged, the doctor made his appearance. He was a man
of fifty, of forbidding aspect and rough exterior.

"Who are you, sir?" demanded he in brusk tones, placing himself in front
of the captain, and without bestowing more than a glance at the patient
on the sofa.

"Captain Sheffield," replied De Banyan as sharply as the question had
been put.

"Are you, indeed? Then you have altered a great deal since I saw you
yesterday," added Dr. Scoville, with an expression of malignant triumph
on his face.

This reply was a damper on any little scheme which the over-confident De
Banyan had proposed to carry out; but the captain was a profound student
in the mysteries of human nature, and at once correctly read the
character of the gentleman who stood before him.

"You didn't see me yesterday, and you know you didn't," he replied in
tones hardly less savage than those of his involuntary host.

"That's very true; I did not," said the doctor.

"This point settled, I'll thank you to turn to the next one, which is the
patient before you."

"You are a plain-spoken man," added Dr. Scoville, still gazing intently
into the face of the captain; who, however, returned the look as
resolutely and as earnestly as it was given.

"I am; I don't waste words when my friend is dying, for aught I know.
Will you attend to this man?"

"Who is he?"

"He is a man shot through the arm, and needing instant surgical
attendance," answered De Banyan impatiently. "It isn't necessary to know
any more before you examine him."

"Good!" exclaimed the doctor with a smile such as that in which a hyena
might be supposed to indulge when pleased, if hyenas ever are pleased.

He turned to Somers, and proceeded to examine into his condition. The
coat of the patient was removed from his insensible form, and he was
carefully disposed on the sofa, according to the directions of the
doctor; the captain and the negro women assisting in the work. Though the
surgeon was as rough as a bear in his tone and manner, he was as tender
as a loving mother in his treatment of the sufferer, and handled him as
carefully as though he had been a new-born babe. The blood was stanched,
and the wound dressed as skilfully as human hands and human knowledge
could perform the operation.

"What do you think of him?" asked De Banyan, full of anxiety for his
suffering companion.

"He won't die just yet; but he may lose his arm."

"Good heavens! do you think so?" exclaimed the captain.

"No; I don't think so."

"What did you say so for, then?"

"I didn't say so."

"Didn't you say he would lose his arm?" demanded De Banyan savagely.

"I didn't say so."

"What did you say, then?"

"I said he might lose his arm. You may lose your arm; but I think you are
more likely to lose your head. Who is this young man?"

"He is a friend of mine; and, as I find it necessary to be entirely
candid with an old fellow like you, I shall answer no questions in regard
to him at present."

"Indeed!"

"Not a question, Dr. Scoville. I intend to have him stay at your house
till he is able to join his regiment; and I intend to stay with him."

"You do me unmerited honor by making my humble house your home," said the
doctor satirically.

"I think you are worthy of the honor, Dr. Scoville. As your humble house,
I think it is very well got up, creditable to your taste, and altogether
a fine place."

"Thank you," growled the host. "I suppose you have no objection to my
informing the Confederate States military officers in the city of your
presence here?"

"Not the slightest," answered De Banyan promptly. "I propose to inform
them myself in due time."

"What did you say your name was?"

"Captain Sheffield."

"Of Petersburg?"

"No, sir."

"Not of Petersburg?"

"No, sir; of Nashville, Tennessee, which I can further inform you is the
capital of the State. I have the honor to be a captain in the Third
Tennessee. I served in Mexico, in the Crimea, and in Italy. I was present
at four battles in the Crimea, seven in Italy, five in Mexico; I have
been engaged in nine battles of the present war, and have been wounded
six times."

"Were you ever killed?"

"Never was so unfortunate. Can I furnish you with any further
information?"

"No more at present," replied the doctor, compressing his lips,
apparently to keep from laughing, but really because he could not think
of anything sharp enough to dash so ready a talker. "If you do me the
honor to remain here a week, I shall have better opportunities of hearing
your marvelous experience, Captain Sheffield. Ah, what have we here?"
continued he as three horsemen galloped up the roadway.

A violent knocking was presently heard at the side door of the house, and
Dr. Scoville hastened to learn the errand of the excited visitors.


CHAPTER XXIX

DE BANYAN AT WORK


"How do you feel, my dear boy?" asked Captain de Banyan as soon as the
doctor had left the room.

Somers, by the skilful applications of the physician, had been restored
to consciousness, and had listened with astonishment, not unmingled with
alarm, to the last part of the conversation between his friend and their
host.

"I feel a little better, captain; at any rate, I am more comfortable,"
replied Somers.

"I am glad to hear it. I have been terribly worried about you."

"I think I shall do well enough. But what shall I say for myself?"

"Say nothing, Somers--not a word. Don't commit yourself to anything."

"What have you told him?"

"Nothing; and I don't intend to tell him anything. He is a jolly old
fellow, who thinks he is very eccentric, and takes pride in being
considered so. When I was in the Crimea----"

"Never mind the Crimea now," interrupted Somers with a languid smile.

"I was only going to say that I understand the old doctor first-rate, and
can manage him as easily as I could an old plow-horse. Keep still,
Somers; don't let on, under any circumstances. Leave me to do all the
talking."

"But the cavalry are after us now."

"Never mind; the doctor will take care of them."

"They will recognize our horses, if they don't know us."

"No matter if they do."

Somers thought it was matter; and he could not see for the life of him
how De Banyan was to get out of such a scrape as this; for it was an
infinitely worse one than his own experience on the Williamsburg road. He
could only hope for the best, expecting nothing but disaster.

"Good! Bully for the doctor!" exclaimed De Banyan as the sounds of an
excited controversy at the side door reached the ears of the patient and
his friend. "He is doing just what I expected him to do."

"Pray, what did you expect him to do?" asked Somers, who could not see
what a rebel surgeon could be expected to do under the circumstances,
besides delivering them up to the military authorities.

"I expect him to protect us to the utmost of his ability; and, in my
opinion, he has quite as much influence as any other man in Petersburg.
When you see a man like Dr. Scoville, you may depend upon it he is a
power in the community where he lives. He knows it as well as any other
person. Let the doctor alone, and he will manage the matter as skilfully
as he dressed your wounded arm."

Whatever confidence Captain de Banyan had in the will and the ability of
Dr. Scoville to protect them, he was curious to hear what the soldiers
and what the doctor had to say. He was not quite willing to be seen by
the rebel soldiers; so he passed quickly into the entry, and took a
position where he could hear without being observed.

"Do you know who I am, you villain?" demanded the doctor, in tones so
full of rage, that the troopers ought to have been annihilated, though it
appears that they were not.

"I don't care who you are; I want the men that came here an hour ago,"
replied one of the troopers.

"If Jeff Davis himself came for them, he couldn't have them!" roared Dr.
Scoville.

"I tell you, sir, one of them is a deserter, and the other is a Yankee."

"I don't care what they are. Report my answer to the provost-marshal;
tell him Dr. Scoville will be responsible for the safety of the men."

"I won't report any such answer to him."

"If a man of you attempts to enter my house, I'll shoot him!" replied the
doctor, taking a rifle from a nail in the entry.

"Very well, sir; if you can shoot any better than we can, you may begin,"
said the soldier. "But, as sure as you fire, you are a dead man."

"And those of you whom I don't shoot will be hung as soon as you report
the death of Dr. Scoville at headquarters."

Whatever the soldiers thought, they were not willing to assume the
responsibility of shooting a man like the doctor, whose splendid mansion
was a guaranty of his wealth and high standing, and whose strong words
assured them that he was a man of influence. Even the possibility of
being hanged in such a cause was not agreeable to contemplate; and the
doctor carried the day against his assailants.

"I don't want to shoot you, Dr. Scoville; but I shall put a guard over
your house, and wait for further orders," said the soldier, who appeared
to be a sergeant.

"Do anything you please; but don't you enter my house. Every man, woman
and child here is under my protection," replied the doctor, as he
restored the rifle to its original position; and the troopers retired
from the door.

Captain de Banyan withdrew from the hall, and joined Somers in the
sitting-room, where he was immediately followed by the doctor. The
situation did not look very hopeful, even to a man of such desperate
fortunes as the bold Tennessean. The house was surrounded by rebel
soldiers, and a report of the case would probably be made to the
provost-marshal; therefore it was not at all likely that the doughty
doctor could long remain contumacious.

"So, my mysterious friend, you are a Confederate deserter, are you?" said
the doctor, as he placed himself in front of the captain, thrust his
hands deep down into the pockets of his pants, and stared at his guest
with all the vigor of an active and piercing eye.

"You say that I am; but I adhere to my original resolution, to say
nothing at present," replied De Banyan, returning the gaze of the doctor
as earnestly as it was given.

"If you were Abe Lincoln himself, you are safe in my house," said the
doctor after a long pause. "But I wish you to understand clearly and
precisely what I mean. I am not the man to shield a deserter or a Yankee
from the penalty due to his crimes. You came into my house with a wounded
man. I am an Arab on the subject of hospitality. Whoever comes into my
house is my guest; and I never betrayed a man who trusted in me."

"Thank you, doctor."

"You needn't thank me, for I despise you from the deepest depths of my
heart; and in due time you will fall into the hands of the military
authorities, but not in my house."

"Thank you, Dr. Scoville. I appreciate your hospitality, and despise you
as much as you do me," answered De Banyan.

"Despise me! How dare you----"

"Oh! I dare do anything; and I beg leave to inform you that neither
myself nor my friend will fall into the hands of the soldiers, either in
your house or outside of it. You can set your mind entirely at ease on
that subject."

"I am tempted for once to violate even my own law of hospitality."

"As you please, doctor; that matter is for you to consider, not for me.
But I beg you to understand precisely what I say. I am very thankful to
you for your kindness; and I assure you that whatever you do and say, I
shall remember your hospitality with the most grateful emotions. I speak
for myself and for my friend."

Dr. Scoville seemed to be very much perplexed, as the captain evidently
intended he should be; and, turning abruptly from the deserter, he paced
the room, rapidly and in silence, for several minutes. De Banyan sat down
by the side of Somers, and said a great many comforting things to him,
which, in his weak and suffering condition, were as grateful as a woman's
smile at the couch of pain.

Breakfast was ready, and with the utmost politeness the doctor conducted
his guest to the table, while one of the black women was ordered to
supply the wants of the patient on the sofa. During the meal, not a word
was said about the war, or the peculiar circumstances under which the
patient and his friend had come to the house. The captain discoursed
about the wars in other lands, and it is more than probable that he
exercised the credulity of the doctor to the utmost. Both the host and
the guest were affable to the last degree; for the choleric physician was
conscious that he had more than a match in the other.

After breakfast, Somers was conducted to the guest-chamber on the second
floor of the mansion. He was as tenderly cared for by the doctor and the
servants as though he had been an honored friend, instead of a hunted
enemy. In the course of the forenoon, Dr. Scoville received a visit from
the provost-marshal, attended by half a company of cavalry. Of course,
the captain was exceedingly curious to know the result of this interview,
which was conducted in the most courteous manner; and he was so impolite
as to play the part of a listener. The officer was informed that Captain
Sheffield had been dangerously wounded by the fugitives; but the
eccentric physician positively refused to have his guests taken from his
house, assuring the provost-marshal that he would be responsible for
their safe-keeping, and offered to board a dozen men who should be
employed in guarding them. The officer protested in gentlemanly terms
against such a course; but it was evident that the doctor was the
greatest man in Petersburg, and must have his own way.

The result of the conference was, that the provost-marshal yielded the
point, and a sentinel was placed at the door of Somers's chamber, to
which the captain had retreated. The officer visited the room, and fully
identified his prisoner, between whom and himself a sharp conversation
ensued, much to the amusement of the doctor. The captain was assured that
in due time, he should swing, which pleasant information he received with
becoming good nature, promising to be present when the exciting event
should take place. The provost-marshal retired, satisfied with the
precautions he had taken.

For the following three days, the sentinel at the door, with a loaded
musket in his hand, kept guard over his prisoners. Somers had improved
rapidly, though by the advice of his managing friend, he pretended to be
much worse than he really was. Dr. Scoville, though he still kept his
word and maintained his position with regard to the prisoners,
continually "thorned" the captain with a prospect of the gallows, which
he declared was his certain doom. De Banyan still preserved his
equanimity, and still declared that he should never be hanged.

"What do you intend to do?" asked Somers on the third day of his
confinement, after the doctor had taunted his guest with more than usual
severity.

"I haven't the least idea, my dear boy," replied the captain with a grim
smile. "So far, I have no plans. When you are able to move, Somers, we
will see what can be done."

"I can move now; you need not delay a single hour on my account. I am all
right but my arm."

De Banyan was by no means as cheerful as he appeared to be. He was
troubled, and paced the room with uneasy tread; but, the moment the
doctor entered the room, he was as gay as a Broadway beau. Somers had
vainly attempted to persuade him to make his own escape, and leave him to
his fate; but the brave fellow steadily refused to desert him under any
circumstances that could possibly present themselves.

The captain was remarkably still for him, after Somers had convinced him
that he was able to move. He paced the room as before; but his eyes were
glancing uneasily at the floor, the ceiling, and the walls of the
apartment. The work had commenced in his mind; and Somers watched his
movements with interest, yet without hope. On one side of the fire-place
in the room there was a door, which was locked, but which evidently
opened into a closet.

Before this door, De Banyan suddenly came to a dead halt. He examined it
with the utmost care; and then with a fork from the breakfast things
which had not been removed, he commenced operations upon the lock. One of
the prongs of the fork was broken off between two bricks in the
fire-place, and the other bent; so that the instrument formed a very good
pick-lock. The door was opened without the expenditure of much time or
patience; and the captain proceeded to explore the interior of the
closet, after instructing his fellow-prisoner to give him timely warning
of any movement on the part of the sentinel.

Somers did not see the captain again for half an hour, but when he came
out he looked as though he had endured the tortures of a month of
suspense; but, with a ghastly smile, he told his companion that the hour
for action had come.

"What do you mean, captain?" demanded Somers.

"Let us use haste; we shall have more time to talk to-morrow, when we get
back to the camp on the other side of the James River. Are you very sure
that you can stand the fatigue of a long walk?"

"I know I can."

"Then come with me; but a particle of noise will be fatal to us."

De Banyan led the way to the closet; but, before he entered himself, he
tied together the two sheets of the bed, and made one end fast to one of
the bed-posts, near a window at the end of the house, which he opened
without noise. Dropping the sheet out, he retreated to the closet, and
with the pick-lock secured the door. They were in darkness now, and
seating themselves on the floor, with palpitating hearts they waited the
issue. For more than an hour they waited the expected alarm. They could
occasionally hear a movement on the part of the sentinel in the entry;
but he probably thought it was foolish to be very vigilant over a man so
sick as Somers. But the demonstration came at last; and the prisoners,
sweltering in the confined air of the closet, listened with breathless
interest to the shouts of the soldiers outside, and to the rapid steps of
those within the mansion.

The doctor and the sentinel entered the chamber so lately occupied by the
prisoners. The former swore in no measured terms at the faithlessness of
the sentry at the door, and at the stupidity of those who guarded the
house outside. But they seemed to have no doubt as to the manner of the
escape.

There was the open window, and the rope made of the bed-linen, which De
Banyan had pulled with his hands till it had the appearance of having
sustained a great weight. Dr. As confidence men were elected: citizen
Goeppingen, Notz-Stuttgart, acorn villages-Mannheim, Günzel-Speier,
Sonnemann-Frankfurt aM, Stutt man Ruesselsheim, Dr. Kirchner-Hildesheim,
Heymann-Koburg, Motteler-Crimmitschau, Krause-Mülsen (St.

Jacob), Bremen, Magdeburg, Vahlteich-Maxen (near Dresden), Dresden
Kobitzsch, Upper Winder-Vienna, Löwenstein-Fürth. The low representation
of northern Germany under the trust men was caused, that the representatives
of the North German clubs, with few exceptions, belonged to the opposition
and the withdrawal of their clubs from the association had agreed to. The
Workers' Federation published its constitution after a call, in which
he heated accusations against the Nuremberg Vereinstag and brought it to
untruths and deformities could not be missing. Then I answered
in No. 46 of the "Democratic Wochenblatt" under the September 23, 1868
in a long statement in which I dismissed the attacks. Among other things,
in opposing the appeal has been said, we wanted the workers to a
"socially-communist views" lure. Then I noticed a strange position of
"social-communist", there are only two words, and yet they contain,
firstly, stupidity, a lie, secondly, thirdly, a denunciation.

The last I saw is that you by the word Communism is not just the haves,
but also the workers in front of us wanted to make head-shy. The words
"socialist" and "socialism" is no longer enough, because workers and
employers are already accustomed. This would more and more that socialism
is nothing so terrible because the word communism must excuse to fear
the Philistines in the limbs to hunt. The decisions of the Nuremberg
tags Association created the movement for a new location.

Now could not, so far as the Schweitzer in his Moniteur, the "social
democrat", the members of the General German Workers' Association had
repeatedly proclaimed, by a petty-bourgeois Bourgeoispartei when he named
the Saxon People's Party to designate popular question, although he just
knew that the bourgeois elements in the same vanishing minority. In
any case, they were not stronger than in the general German
Workers' Association, as Liebknecht him next spring at the General Assembly
of the General German Workers' Association in Elberfeld's face said
what he affirmative nod yes. The agitators also learned that he gave us a
few months later to our fight to Saxony sent.

One of the same - L. Sch., Who later transferred to the Zünftlern and
today wohlbestallter Head of a shoemaker's guild is - said afterwards:
"Schweitzer has tricked us bös in the crowded meetings that we held,
we as workers and nothing again Workers seen. "He would add: and our
success was zero.

Liebknecht and I followed them almost all the meetings that they
held, and brought them one defeat after another in.

Now, could no longer be denied that in the Saxon People's Party and
the Federation of Workers Associations now a socialist party, there
was the on the ground of international standing.

The Nuremberg conference and its results made therefore in the general
impression of German Workers Association, which already against
Schweitzer, a deep mistrust existed. The effect appeared during the
following year. Had then at the head of the General German Workers'
Association of the right man confessed the unification of socialist-minded
workers would now become a fact.
Of course, he could
not have believed that Alick would be so ungrateful and ungenerous as to
run away from him; but it is a fact which speaks well for the negro race,
that so many have preferred liberty with toil and hardship to slavery
with ease and plenty.

Somers had over-estimated his power of endurance; and a hard gallop of
five miles was about the extent of his capacity. The rude jolting of his
arm made it extremely painful, while his system, reduced by the fever
attending the wound, was incapable of supporting such a heavy draft upon
his strength. He bore up against the pain and faintness which beset him
as long as he could; but at last, to the oft-repeated inquiries of
Captain de Banyan in regard to his condition, he was compelled to answer
in the most discouraging terms.

"We must stop and rest," said the captain. "We have about fifteen miles
more to go; and you mustn't break down yet, Somers."

"Here, massa, take some of this," said Alick, as he reined in his horse.

"What is it?" asked Somers faintly.

"Brandy."

"I can't drink brandy."

"It will do you good, my dear boy. There is strength in brandy--only as
medicine. Don't be stubborn, Somers."

"Good brandy, massa," added Alick. "I brought it along on purpose for
you. I was mighty feared you wouldn't be able to stand the ride."

"I am willing to take it if it will do me any good," said Somers. "I am
about used up."

The sufferer drank two or three swallows of the fiery liquid from the
bottle after he had dismounted. The potion gave him an artificial life,
which enabled him to ride five miles farther, though at a much slower
pace than before. The roads seemed to be entirely deserted, and the party
felt satisfied that they had passed out of the reach of a successful
pursuit. Another dose of brandy gave Somers strength enough to accomplish
fifteen miles of the journey; but at this point he was absolutely unable
to sit on his horse. With the assistance of De Banyan, he got off and lay
for two hours on the ground, where his devoted companions made him a bed
of their coats. Alick produced some bacon and crackers, which he had
brought for an emergency, of which Somers partook in small quantities.
Pressed by his fellow-fugitives, he again drank some brandy; and while
his head was flying round like a top, his friends placed him on the horse
again.

In the overpowering weakness and suffering of the hour, Somers had begged
his companions to leave him to his fate; but De Banyan declared that he
would be hanged a dozen times before he would do so mean and wicked an
act. With the fumes of the brandy darting in every direction through his
brain, which seemed to be about fifty feet above his shoulders, he
spurred on his horse. The liquor had inspired him to a kind of
desperation. He hardly knew what he was about, and even forgot the pain
of his wounded arm.

"Halt!" shouted De Banyan, as the party dashed over a rude bridge
extending across a broad creek. "Halt, Somers!"

But Somers heeded not the word, and still spurred on, till the captain,
who rode the fastest animal, could overtake him. He succeeded in stopping
the furious rider, and in making him understand that they had reached the
end of their journey in this direction. They returned to the bridge,
where the sharp eye of the captain had discerned a boat moored to a tree,
a short distance below the road. Somers, still stupefied by the effects
of the brandy, tamely submitted to whatever disposition his companions
chose to make of him. Taking off their coats, they made for him a bed in
the bottom of the boat, which was a large yawl, evidently used for
conveying merchandise to some point farther up the creek. The horses were
turned loose, and the captain and Alick took the oars.

After pulling for half an hour, they were rewarded by a view of the broad
river which to them was like the Land of Promise; and moored in the
middle there was a steamer, which in those waters could belong to no
other party than the United States Government. They rowed out to this
vessel, and hailed her. Of course they were cordially welcomed after a
satisfactory explanation had been given.

"Glory hallelujah! How do you feel, Somers?" said Captain de Banyan,
after he had insured a proper reception on board of the steamer.

"Badly, very badly," replied Somers faintly.

"Well, cheer up, my boy! We have got home again."

"Home!" said Somers, raising himself partially up at the sound of that
magical word.

The captain and Alick lifted him tenderly, and assisted him up the
accommodation-ladder of the steamer. The vessel was a gunboat bound up
the river, and was waiting for the daylight. Somers was taken to the
ward-room, where the surgeon dressed his arm, and prescribed for his
bodily ailments. Alick was duly installed as his nurse, though Captain de
Banyan performed the greater part of his duty. But the consciousness that
he was again beneath the old flag did more for the patient than even the
assiduous care of his devoted friends.

After leaving Petersburg the fugitives had pursued a nearly easterly
course till they arrived at the bridge over Chipoak Creek, where they had
abandoned their horses, and taken the boat. Alick had chosen this
direction to avoid the pickets which were on the lookout for them in the
vicinity of the City Point Railroad. His calculations had been well made,
and he was rewarded for his zeal and skill by the priceless boon of
freedom, which he preferred even to the life of comfort and ease he had
enjoyed beneath the roof of his kind but eccentric master.

How Dr. Scoville ever made his peace with the provost-marshal of
Petersburg we are not informed; but we will venture to say that his whims
were not respected after the events we have narrated. He was a wilful
man; but his guests were very sorry to be compelled to make him such an
ungenerous return for his noble hospitality. When the war is ended, and
he is enabled fully to understand the meaning of treason to our
beneficent Government, no doubt he will be very thankful that his
prisoner guests escaped as they did.

At nine o'clock on the following morning, the gunboat dropped her anchor
off Harrison's Landing. Somers, who had slept for several hours, was more
comfortable, though he was still in a deplorable condition. With the
kindly assistance of his friends, he was landed at the pier, and conveyed
in an ambulance to the headquarters of the division. Leaning on the arm
of De Banyan, he entered the tent of the general.

"Captain Somers!" exclaimed the general. "I had given you up for lost.
Why, you have grown ten years older in five days!"

"I have the honor to make my report, general," said Somers with a faint
smile.

"Your report? Good! After losing you, I did not dare to send another
officer upon such a perilous errand. But, Captain Somers, you are all
used up," added the general, with a glance filled with sympathy--a look
which Somers regarded as an adequate reward for all he had suffered; for
to have _that_ man feel an interest in him was better in his estimation
than the plaudits of the multitude. "What is the matter with your arm?"

"I was shot at Petersburg," replied Somers.

"Well, well, captain, you must go to the hospital: and
Captain--what's-his-name----"

"Captain de Banyan, at your service," promptly responded Somers's
faithful friend.

"Captain de Banyan shall report for you, and tell me all about this
scrape," added the general. "Get into your carriage, Captain Somers, and
go to the hospital. I will call and see you to-day or to-morrow."

"Thank you, general."

Captain de Banyan assisted him into the ambulance; and, when he had
placed him in the care of the surgeon, he returned to headquarters to
tell the marvelous story of their capture by the rebels, and their escape
from Petersburg. It is quite likely that he did not add his experience in
Tennessee; but when the general called on Somers at the hospital the next
morning, the latter supplied all that had been withheld. The general had
a higher regard for the captain's patriotism than ever before, for he had
voluntarily renounced the ranks of the rebellion, and placed himself on
the side of his country. There was nothing against him; on the contrary,
his conduct had been in the highest degree praiseworthy. But Captain de
Banyan was sensitive on this point; and the general readily promised to
conceal what the brave fellow regarded as a stain upon his character.

Captain Somers did not improve so rapidly as his friends desired. The
surgeon declared that his night ride from Petersburg, in his feeble
condition, had done him more injury than a year's hard service; and after
he had been in the hospital ten days, it was deemed advisable to give him
a furlough, and send him home, especially as the division was then under
orders to march to Yorktown. The gallant young hero regretted the
necessity of leaving the regiment just as he had been promoted; but he
was in no condition to endure the long and weary march. He was able to
walk about a little; and on the day before the sailing of the transport
by which he was to proceed to Washington, he received another visit from
the general.

After a few kind inquiries in regard to the invalid's condition, the
general took from his pocket one of those great official envelopes which
so often carry joy to the heart of the gallant officer. Somers was
amazed. It could not be possible that his own promotion was indicated by
this document. It was not three weeks since his commission as captain had
reached him; but then Senator Guilford was a great man, and wielded a
tremendous influence, both at Washington, and with the military
authorities of his native State.

Recalling his former declaration to Captain de Banyan, he was fully
resolved to decline any further promotion, at least until he had done
something which entitled him to this distinction. The general held up the
formidable packet, while Somers's pale face was suffused with blushes.

"I have brought you a major's commission, Somers; and I know it will give
you joy."

"Really, sir; ah! general, I don't think----"

"Don't you?" laughed the general.

"I don't deserve it, general; and you will pardon me if I say I cannot
accept it. I am very grateful to you; but----"

"Oh, it isn't for you!" roared the general as he handed him the official
paper.

"Major de Banyan!" exclaimed Captain Somers as he read the superscription
with a thrill of delight. "It is indeed a joy to me. I am ten times as
happy as I should have been if my own name had been coupled with that
title. I am ever so much obliged to you."

"Senator Guilford again! By the way, Captain Somers, you must call on him
when you get to Washington."

"I shall certainly do so. But I know my friend could not have been
promoted without the good word which you have spoken for him."

"Well, it is all right, captain. Major de Banyan is a brave fellow. He
has done you a good turn; and I waylaid this document so as to afford you
the pleasure of being the first to address him by his new title."

"Thank you, general."

"And, captain, if you could prevail on the major to be a little more
reasonable in some of the lies he tells, his reputation for veracity
would be improved."

"I will endeavor to do so."

The general bade the invalid a hearty and even affectionate adieu; and
they did not meet again till they grasped hands on the bloody field of
Antietam, where Somers acted in a new sphere of duty. No sooner had the
general departed, than Somers, inspired to new vigor by the joyful event
which had just transpired, hastened to the camp of the regiment.

"Ah, Somers; my dear boy! how are you now?" said his friend as he seized
his hand.

"Better, I thank you, _Major_ de Banyan."

"Come, now, Somers, that is cruel! A friend of mine, just before the
battle of Solferino----"

"Confound the battle of Solferino, Major de Banyan!"

"I was about to say that a friend of mine, just before the battle of
Solferino, made fun of my aspirations, just as you do now----"

"I don't do anything of the sort. Here's the official document. If I read
right, it says Major de Banyan."

"Somers," said the captain, winking very rapidly to dissipate some
evidences of weakness which were struggling for existence in his
eyes--"Somers, you have done this."

"I did write to Senator Guilford about you before we went over the river;
and now I thank God with all my soul that I did so."

"Somers, you are one of the best of friends!" exclaimed the major as he
stood with the unopened document in his hand.

"And so are you. Without you, I should have been in a rebel prison or
under the sod at this time."

"God bless you, Somers!" ejaculated De Banyan, as with trembling hand he
opened the envelope, and took therefrom his major's commission. "I have
loved you just like a younger brother; not selfishly, my dear boy, but
with my whole heart. You haven't disappointed me, only once, when----"

"Don't mention it. I thought you were a rebel then, but I repented."

"I don't blame you. Now, Somers, you are going home. May God bless you
and keep you! I shall be as sad as a maiden who has lost her lover, while
you are gone."

"I shall not be absent long. We shall be together again in a few weeks."

"I hope so. I have no home now. It has been desolated by treason. I heard
since I came over that my wife was dead. I had a son, a boy of fifteen; I
know not where he is. Well, well; I will not groan or complain. I will do
my duty to my country, and that shall cheer my heart;" and with an effort
of his powerful will, he banished the sad reflections from his mind, and
smiled as though earth had no sorrows. "After the battle of Magenta, I
had the blues, and----"

"One word, De Banyan. _Were_ you at the battle of Magenta?" said Somers
solemnly.

The major looked on the ground, at the commission he had just received,
and then into the sympathizing face of his friend.

"To tell the truth, Somers, I was not; but I fought in every battle in
Mexico, from Vera Cruz up to the capital."

Somers improved this opportunity to repeat the injunction of the general.

"Now promise me, major, that you will never say Magenta or anything of
the sort again as long as you live," added Somers.

"That would be a rash promise. I have got a bad habit, and I will try to
cure myself of it. On my soul I will, my dear boy!"

In the course of the conversation the major, who was now in a
truth-telling mood, informed Somers that he had, after his escape from
the rebel army, enlisted in the regular army, where he had been made a
sergeant, and, through the influence of a Massachusetts officer, had been
commissioned as a captain. His gallantry had won a swift reward.

On the following day they parted on board the transport in the river; and
in that sad hour the friendship which, though brief in duration, had been
fruitful enough for a lifetime, was pledged for the future. They parted,
De Banyan to mingle in the terrible scenes in which the regiment was
engaged before the close of the month, and Somers to bask in the smiles
of the loved ones at home. Alick, who had been regularly installed as the
captain's servant, went with him.


CHAPTER XXXI

WASHINGTON, BOSTON AND PINCHBROOK


Though the session of Congress had closed a month before, Captain Somers
was gratified to learn on his arrival that Senator Guilford and his
family were still in Washington, the distinguished gentleman having been
detained by important public business. As soon as he could make himself
presentable, he hastened to pay his respects to the Senator, and thank
him for his kindness. He was not at home. Emma received him with a warm
blush of pleasure on her fair cheeks. She had entirely recovered from the
effects of the accident; and her tribute of gratitude was so eloquently
poured forth, that the gallant young captain, who had hardly seen a young
lady before for two months, could not exactly tell whether he stood on
his head or his heels; for praise from those beautiful lips produced a
sensation of giddiness in the region of the brain.

Young men will be silly in spite of all we dignified old fogies can say
to convince them of the folly of being carried away by the witching arts
of pretty, graceful little creatures like Emma Guilford. Perhaps the
remembrance of the scene on the railroad was some excuse for him; and it
is entirely unnecessary to apologize for anything a beautiful girl may
do, especially if she be the daughter of a Senator. The young lady said a
great many pretty things, and the young gentleman a great many smart
ones, before she discovered that the captain was wounded in the arm,
though she had already remarked upon his pale face and rather attenuated
form.

He told her when and where he was wounded; and of course she wanted to
know all about his adventures in Secessia. He was as willing as Othello
to speak

                                "Of most disastrous chances,
          Of moving accidents, by flood and field;
          Of hairbreadth scapes i' the imminent deadly breach;
          Of being taken by the insolent foe."

All this to hear did Emma Guilford seriously incline. But he had hardly
commenced the story before the Senator himself entered the room.

"Ah! Captain Somers, I am delighted to see you!" said he with enthusiasm,
as he extended his hand, which our hero as warmly grasped.

"Thank you, sir. I have called to express my obligations to you for all
your kindness to me and to my friend. Major de Banyan wished to be kindly
remembered to you."

"I am happy to hear from the major; and as for the rest, I feel that I
have not yet begun to discharge my obligation to you. Why didn't you
write to me before?"

"I did not wish to burden you with any remembrance of such a humble
individual as myself."

"You are too modest by half, Captain Somers. I should not have known
anything about you if it hadn't been for General---- Well, no matter
who," laughed the Senator.

"Now, papa, you have cut short the most interesting story that ever was
told!" interposed Emma.

Count Gobineau, J. Burckhardt, Mrs. Nietzsche, F. Tönnies, E. Hammacher
(see his book: "the basic problems of modern culture"), M.

Scheler (see "resentment in the construction of the Morales'), W.

Sombart -- they all had, albeit with largely different reasons and
foundations, in fact, the thesis gehuldigt that the Occident in the
19th Century in decline. The circle of Stefan George thought in the same
direction.

E. von Hartmann's universal history pessimism also sought on a
historical-philosophical Dekadenzlehre out. Only the lush comfort of the
German upper classes during the Wilhelmine era could hear voices of warning
and create the appearance that one of progress and advancement of
Europe was so agreed, such as Hegel and in another form and nature
of the positivist Comte and Spencer taught had.

Admittedly arrogates all these thinkers are not mentioned, it astronomically
to be able to predict what will happen and, as Spengler due to its alleged
vague phase and simultaneousness laws has done, according to which,
for example, Buddhism, stoicism and socialism within the phase sequence
of the Indian, Roman and modern civilization "simultaneously"
should be. It was enough to them as it only possible and useful,
by declining to talk about trends, their implementation by the original
freedom of the human personality or history but by arationale
principle factors also could be reversed.

It was a different sensation from that which
had come over him in the presence of Emma Guilford. He experienced a
feeling of awe before her, but he could talk as fast as ever; while to
Lilian he stammered, couldn't remember anything, and made woful confusion
in his words and in his ideas.

When the ice was broken, he succeeded in telling her something about his
adventures in Virginia, and roused a very strong desire in her mind to
see the wonderful Major de Banyan. But his brief hour expired all too
soon; it faded in a moment, and seemed like a tale that was told.

"I wore your socks at the battles of Savage's Station, Glendale and White
Oak Swamp, Miss Ashford," said he; "and I shall keep them for future
service of the same kind. If I am killed in battle, I shall be found with
those socks on my feet."

"Oh, I hope you won't be killed!" exclaimed she with a shudder.

"Well, I hope not; but, as soon as I am able, I shall return to my duty."

"What a brave fellow you are! I shouldn't think you would dare to stand
up before the cannons, and the muskets, and the bayonets."

"When I feel like running away, I always think of my socks," said Somers.

But the carriage had come for him, and Alick stood at the door waiting
for his appearance. He took the little soft white hand in his own, and
readily promised, when she invited him, to call again soon and see her
grandmother, who was out of town that day. Of course, Somers was deeply
interested in that venerable lady, and actually looked forward with
intense pleasure to the anticipated visit.

He was driven to the railroad station, and reached Pinchbrook at "high
twelve," when the Pinchbrookers were just going to their dinners. Captain
Barney, as usual, was at the depot, and gave him a seaman's welcome home.
He insisted upon being driven to the cottage before dinner; and the old
shipmaster, finding that Captain Somers carried too many guns for him,
gracefully yielded the point.

"Bless my stars, if there ain't Thomas!" cried Mrs. Somers as she jumped
up from the dinner-table, and actually upset the teapot in the operation.

"How do you do, mother? How do you do, father?" exclaimed the young
captain as he shook hands with his father and Gran'ther Green, kissed his
mother, and hugged his sister.

"How pale you look, Thomas!" said his mother. "I declare, you are as thin
as a hatchet! How is your arm?"

"Better, mother; I shall be as good as new in a few days."

"You look pale; but your face is as nateral as life," said Gran'ther
Green. "I don't know what we shall do with two cap'ns in the family."

"I think we can manage that, gran'ther," replied Somers, as he took the
place at the table which had been prepared for him.

                    *       *       *       *       *

We drop the curtain upon the scenes which followed; for our patient
reader can better imagine than we can describe them. Our hero was once
more within the hallowed precincts of home; all its sacred joys flowed in
upon his soul; and he thanked the good Father who had conducted him
through so many perils, and restored him to the hearts of the loved ones
who yearned for him in his absence. They were as grateful for his return
as he was--grateful that God had restored him at all; but doubly so that
he had come with his soul unstained by the vices of the camp and the
wickedness of the great world.

The health of Captain Somers did not permit his return to the army to
participate in those great battles before Washington in which his
regiment was reduced to a mere skeleton of its former self. But, while
the country was breathing slowly and fearfully before the terrors of
Lee's invasion of Maryland, there came to Pinchbrook a letter from the
gallant general of division--now in command of a _corps d'armée_--under
whom he had before served, containing an appointment on his staff. Though
still but partially restored to health, he hastened to accept his new
position, and started at once for the scene of strife.

His suffering country needed him; and he could not satisfy his sense of
duty, even with the reasonable excuse of a shattered physical frame. He
went, and his record was always honorable and noble in success and in
misfortune.

THE END


      *      *      *      *      *      *


A. L. BURT'S CATALOGUE OF BOOKS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
BY POPULAR WRITERS, 52-58 DUANE STREET, NEW YORK

BOOKS FOR BOYS.

Joe's Luck: A Boy's Adventures in California. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo,
cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

The story is chock fall of stirring incidents, while the amusing
situations are furnished by Joshua Bickford, from Pumpkin Hollow, and the
fellow who modestly styles himself the "Rip-tail Roarer, from Pike Co.,
Missouri." Mr. Alger never writes a poor book, and "Joe's Luck" is
certainly one of his best.

Tom the Bootblack; or, The Road to Success. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo,
cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

A bright, enterprising lad was Tom the Bootblack. He was not at all
ashamed of his humble calling, though always on the lookout to better
himself. The lad started for Cincinnati to look up his heritage. Mr. Grey,
the uncle, did not hesitate to employ a ruffian to kill the lad. The plan
failed, and Gilbert Grey, once Tom the bootblack, came into a comfortable
fortune. This is one of Mr. Alger's best stories.

Dan the Newsboy. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, price
$1.00.

Dan Mordaunt and his mother live in a poor tenement, and the lad is
pluckily trying to make ends meet by selling papers in the streets of New
York. A little heiress of six years is confided to the care of the
Mordaunts. The child is kidnapped and Dan tracks the child to the house
where she is hidden, and rescues her. The wealthy aunt of the little
heiress is so delighted with Dan's courage and many good qualities that
she adopts him as her heir.

Tony the Hero: A Brave Boy's Adventure with a Tramp. By Horatio Alger, Jr.
12mo, cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

Tony, a sturdy bright-eyed boy of fourteen, is under the control of
Rudolph Rugg, a thorough rascal. After much abuse Tony runs away and gets
a Job as stable boy in a country hotel. Tony is heir to a large estate.
Rudolph for a consideration hunts up Tony and throws him down a deep well.
Of course Tony escapes from the fate provided for him, and by a brave act,
a rich friend secures his rights and Tony is prosperous. A very
entertaining book.

The Errand Boy; or, How Phil Brent Won Success. By Horatio Alger, Jr.
12mo, cloth illustrated, price $1.00.

The career of "The Errand Boy" embraces the city adventures of a
smart country lad. Philip was brought up by a kind-hearted innkeeper
named Brent. The death of Mrs. Brent paved the way for the hero's
subsequent troubles. A retired merchant in New York secures him the
situation of errand boy, and thereafter stands as his friend.

Tom Temple's Career. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, price
$1.00.

Tom Temple is a bright, self-reliant lad. He leaves Plympton village to
seek work in New York, whence he undertakes an important mission to
California. Some of his adventures in the far west are so startling that
the reader will scarcely close the book until the last page shall have
been reached. The tale is written in Mr. Alger's most fascinating style.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publisher, A. L. BURT, 52-58 Duane Street, New York.


BOOKS FOR BOYS.

Frank Fowler, the Cash Boy. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth,
illustrated, price $1.00.

Frank Fowler, a poor boy, bravely determines to make a living for himself
and his foster-sister Grace. Going to New York he obtains a situation as
cash boy in a dry goods store. He renders a service to a wealthy old
gentleman who takes a fancy to the lad, and thereafter helps the lad to
gain success and fortune.

Tom Thatcher's Fortune. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth, illustrated,
price $1.00.

Tom Thatcher is a brave, ambitious, unselfish boy. He supports his mother
and sister on meagre wages earned as a shoe-pegger in John Simpson's
factory. Tom is discharged from the factory and starts overland for
California. He meets with many adventures. The story is told in a way
which has made Mr. Alger's name a household word in so many homes.

The Train Boy. By Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, price
$1.00.

Paul Palmer was a wide-awake boy of sixteen who supported his mother and
sister by selling books and papers on the Chicago and Milwaukee Railroad.
He detects a young man in the act of picking the pocket of a young lady.
In a railway accident many passengers are killed, but Paul is fortunate
enough to assist a Chicago merchant, who out of gratitude takes him into
his employ. Paul succeeds with tact and judgment and is well started on
the road to business prominence.

Mark Mason's Victory. The Trials and Triumphs of a Telegraph Boy. By
Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

Mark Mason, the telegraph boy, was a sturdy, honest lad, who pluckily won
his way to success by his honest manly efforts under many difficulties.
This story will please the very large class of boys who regard Mr. Alger
as a favorite author.

A Debt of Honor. The Story of Gerald Lane's Success in the Far West. By
Horatio Alger, Jr. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

The story of Gerald Lane and the account of the many trials and
disappointments which he passed through before he attained success, will
interest all boys who have read the previous stories of this delightful
author.

Ben Bruce. Scenes in the Life of a Bowery Newsboy. By Horatio Alger, Jr.
12mo, cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

Ben Bruce was a brave, manly, generous boy. The story of his efforts, and
many seeming failures and disappointments, and his final success, are most
interesting to all readers. The tale is written in Mr. Alger's most
fascinating style.

The Castaways; or, On the Florida Reefs. By James Otis. 12mo, cloth,
illustrated, price $1.00.

This tale smacks of the salt sea. From the moment that the Sea Queen
leaves lower New York bay till the breeze leaves her becalmed off the
coast of Florida, one can almost hear the whistle of the wind through her
rigging, the creak of her straining cordage as she heels to the leeward.
The adventures of Ben Clark, the hero of the story and Jake the cook,
cannot fail to charm the reader. As a writer for young people Mr. Otis is
a prime favorite.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publisher, A. L. BURT, 52-58 Duane Street, New York.


BOOKS FOR BOYS.

Wrecked on Spider Island; or, How Ned Rogers Found the Treasure. By James
Otis. 12mo, cloth, illustrated, price $1.00.

Ned Rogers, a "down-east" plucky lad ships as cabin boy to earn a
livelihood. Ned is marooned on Spider Island, and while there discovers a
wreck submerged in the sand, and finds a considerable amount of treasure.
In Switzerland, I was not allowed to stay. The stay in Switzerland was the
Prussian crafts boys forbidden by their government.

Was it the New Burger dispute the year before until the detriment of the
Prussian Government had been terminated.

Furthermore, the Republican boys craft ideas can be recorded, and that was
in the interest of public order be prevented. When I in the spring of 1858
to the Prussian legation in Karlsruhe for permission to reside in Switzerland,
asked me this was with reference to the existing prohibition denied.
So I walked on the Swiss side to Constance, continued to ship on Lake
Constance to Friedrichshafen , with a result of a storm, I was seasick.
From Friedrichshafen, the march on foot through Ravensburg, Biberach,
Ulm, Augsburg to Munich. In Württemberg at that time consisted
in the establishment of the cities that the traveling journeymen
craft a so-called gift to the city could receive, in Rule 6 of the
cruiser was to hold them from the fencing.

I have this gift anywhere diligently collects. From Ulm joined me a
stocky Tyrolese, who looked like a butcher, but was a tailor.

Instead of a Berliner Militärtornister he wore on his back, which gave
him, since he also wore a linen blouse, gave a strange appearance. Since
our money was scarce and fencing at no time as a disgrace for a craft
fraternity was, quite often, we knocked the villages which we passed.
One again, we had lunch in a village, a strategic plan. "You take the right
side, I left!" said. When I came into a house and raised, I received
from the daughter with the gift at the same time warning me to
take in eight, the policeman was nearby.

That I was told and did not speak anymore.
Price
$1.00.

This is the story of a little hunchback who lived on Cape Elizabeth, on
the coast of Maine. His trials and successes are most interesting. From
first to last nothing stays the interest of the narrative. It bears us
along as on a stream whose current varies in direction, but never loses
its force.

With Washington at Monmouth: A Story of Three Philadelphia Boys. By James
Otis. 12mo, ornamental cloth, olivine edges, illustrated, price $1.50.

Three Philadelphia lads assist the American spies and make regular and
frequent visits to Valley Forge in the Winter while the British occupied
the city. The story abounds with pictures of Colonial life skillfully
drawn, and the glimpses of Washington's soldiers which are given shown
that the work has not been hastily done, or without considerable study.
The story is wholesome and patriotic in tone, as are all of Mr. Otis'
works.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publisher, A. L. BURT, 52-58 Duane Street, New York.




BOOKS FOR BOYS.

With Lafayette at Yorktown: A Story of How Two Boys Joined the Continental
Army. By James Otis. 12mo, ornamental cloth, olivine edges, illustrated,
price $1.50.

Two lads from Portmouth, N. H., attempt to enlist in the Colonial Army,
and are given employment as spies. There is no lack of exciting incidents
which the youthful reader craves, but it is healthful excitement brimming
with facts which every boy should be familiar with, and while the reader
is following the adventures of Ben Jaffrays and Ned Allen he is acquiring
a fund of historical lore which will remain in his memory long after that
which he has memorized from textbooks has been forgotten.

At the Siege of Havana. Being the Experiences of Three Boys Serving under
Israel Putnam in 1762. By James Otis. 12mo, ornamental cloth, olivine
edges, illustrated, price $1.50.

"At the Siege of Havana" deals with that portion of the island's history
when the English king captured the capital, thanks to the assistance given
by the troops from New England, led in part by Col. Israel Putnam.

The principal characters are Darius Lunt, the lad who, represented as
telling the story, and his comrades, Robert Clement and Nicholas Vallet.
Colonel Putnam also figures to considerable extent, necessarily, in the
tale, and the whole forms one of the most readable stories founded on
historical facts.

The Defense of Fort Henry. A Story of Wheeling Creek in 1777. By James
Otis. 12mo, ornamental cloth, olivine edges, illustrated, price $1.50.

Nowhere in the history of our country can be found more heroic or
thrilling incidents than in the story of those brave men and women who
founded the settlement of Wheeling in the Colony of Virginia. The recital
of what Elizabeth Zane did is in itself as heroic a story as can be
imagined. The wondrous bravery displayed by Major McCulloch and his
gallant comrades, the sufferings of the colonists and their sacrifice of
blood and life, stir the blood of old as well as young readers.

The Capture of the Laughing Mary. A Story of Three New York Boys in 1776.
By James Otis. 12mo, ornamental cloth, olivine edges, price $1.50.

"During the British occupancy of New York, at the outbreak of the
Revolution, a Yankee lad hears of the plot to take General Washington's
person, and calls in two companions to assist the patriot cause. They do
some astonishing things, and, incidentally, lay the way for an American
navy later, by the exploit which gives its name to the work. Mr. Otis'
books are too well known to require any particular commendation to the
young."--Evening Post.

With Warren at Bunker Hill. A Story of the Siege of Boston. By James Otis.
12mo, ornamental cloth, olivine edges, illustrated, price $1.50.

"This is a tale of the siege of Boston, which opens on the day after the
doings at Lexington and Concord, with a description of home life in
Boston, introduces the reader to the British camp at Charlestown, shows
Gen. Warren at home, describes what a boy thought of the battle of Bunker
Hill, and closes with the raising of the siege. The three heroes, George
Wentworth, Ben Scarlett and an old ropemaker, incur the enmity of a young
Tory, who causes them many adventures the boys will like to read."
--Detroit Free Press.

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of price by the
publisher, A. L. BURT, 52-58 Duane Street, New York.