"I don't think he'll trouble you again."

Gyp's gratitude was qualified by a queer compassion.  After all, his
offence had only been that of loving her.

Fiorsen had been taken to her room, which was larger and cooler than his
own; and the maid was standing by the side of the bed with a scared face.
Gyp signed to her to go.  He opened his eyes presently:

"Gyp!  Oh!  Gyp!  Is it you?  The devilish, awful things I see--don't go
away again!  Oh, Gyp!"  With a sob he raised himself and rested his
forehead against her.  And Gyp felt--as on the first night he came home
drunk--a merging of all other emotions in the desire to protect and heal.

"It's all right, all right," she murmured.  "I'm going to stay. Don't
worry about anything.  Keep quite quiet, and you'll soon be well."

In a quarter of an hour, he was asleep.  His wasted look went to her
heart, and that expression of terror which had been coming and going
until he fell asleep!  Anything to do with the brain was so horrible!
Only too clear that she must stay--that his recovery depended on her.
She was still sitting there, motionless, when the doctor came, and,
seeing him asleep, beckoned her out.  He looked a kindly man, with two
waistcoats, the top one unbuttoned; and while he talked, he winked at Gyp
involuntarily, and, with each wink, Gyp felt that he ripped the veil off
one more domestic secret.  Sleep was the ticket--the very ticket for him!
Had something on his mind--yes!  And--er--a little given to--brandy?  Ah!
all that must stop!  Stomach as well as nerves affected.  Seeing
things--nasty things--sure sign.  Perhaps not a very careful life before
marriage.  And married--how long?  His kindly appreciative eyes swept Gyp
from top to toe.  Year and a half!  Quite so!  Hard worker at his violin,
too?  No doubt!  Musicians always a little inclined to be immoderate--too
much sense of beauty--burn the candle at both ends!  She must see to
that.  She had been away, had she not--staying with her father?  Yes.
But--no one like a wife for nursing.  As to treatment?  Well!  One would
shove in a dash of what he would prescribe, night and morning.  Perfect
quiet.  No stimulant.  A little cup of strong coffee without milk, if he
seemed low.  Keep him in bed at present.  No worry; no excitement. Young
man still.  Plenty of vitality.  As to herself, no undue anxiety.
To-morrow they would see whether a night nurse would be necessary.  Above
all, no violin for a month, no alcohol--in every way the strictest
moderation!  And with a last and friendliest wink, leaning heavily on
that word "moderation," he took out a stylographic pen, scratched on a
leaf of his note-book, shook Gyp's hand, smiled whimsically, buttoned his
upper waistcoat, and departed.

Gyp went back to her seat by the bed.  Irony!  She whose only desire was
to be let go free, was mainly responsible for his breakdown!  But for
her, there would be nothing on his mind, for he would not be married!
Brooding morbidly, she asked herself--his drinking, debts, even the
girl--had she caused them, too?  And when she tried to free him and
herself--this was the result!  Was there something fatal about her that
must destroy the men she had to do with?  She had made her father
unhappy, Monsieur Harmost--Rosek, and her husband!  Even before she
married, how many had tried for her love, and gone away unhappy!  And,
getting up, she went to a mirror and looked at herself long and sadly.


XX

Three days after her abortive attempt to break away, Gyp, with much
heart-searching, wrote to Daphne Wing, telling her of Fiorsen's illness,
and mentioning a cottage near Mildenham, where--if she liked to go--she
would be quite comfortable and safe from all curiosity, and finally
begging to be allowed to make good the losses from any broken
dance-contracts.

Next morning, she found Mr. Wagge with a tall, crape-banded hat in his
black-gloved hands, standing in the very centre of her drawing-room.  He
was staring into the garden, as if he had been vouchsafed a vision of
that warm night when the moonlight shed its ghostly glamour on the
sunflowers, and his daughter had danced out there. She had a perfect view
of his thick red neck in its turndown collar, crossed by a black bow over
a shiny white shirt.  And, holding out her hand, she said:

"How do you do, Mr. Wagge?  It was kind of you to come."

Mr. Wagge turned.  His pug face wore a downcast expression.

"I hope I see you well, ma'am.  Pretty place you 'ave 'ere.  I'm fond of
flowers myself.  They've always been my 'obby."

"They're a great comfort in London, aren't they?"

"Ye-es; I should think you might grow the dahlia here."  And having thus
obeyed the obscure instincts of savoir faire, satisfied some obscurer
desire to flatter, he went on: "My girl showed me your letter.  I didn't
like to write; in such a delicate matter I'd rather be vivey vocey.  Very
kind, in your position; I'm sure I appreciate it.  I always try to do the
Christian thing myself. Flesh passes; you never know when you may have to
take your turn. I said to my girl I'd come and see you."

"I'm very glad.  I hoped perhaps you would."

Mr. Wagge cleared his throat, and went on, in a hoarser voice:

"I don't want to say anything harsh about a certain party in your
presence, especially as I read he's indisposed, but really I hardly know
how to bear the situation.  I can't bring myself to think of money in
relation to that matter; all the same, it's a serious loss to my
daughter, very serious loss.  I've got my family pride to think of.  My
daughter's name, well--it's my own; and, though I say it, I'm
respected--a regular attendant--I think I told you. Sometimes, I assure
you, I feel I can't control myself, and it's only that--and you, if I may
say so, that keeps me in check."

During this speech, his black-gloved hands were clenching and
unclenching, and he shifted his broad, shining boots.  Gyp gazed at them,
not daring to look up at his eyes thus turning and turning from
Christianity to shekels, from his honour to the world, from his anger to
herself.  And she said:

"Please let me do what I ask, Mr. Wagge.  I should be so unhappy if I
mightn't do that little something."

Mr. Wagge blew his nose.

"It's a delicate matter," he said.  "I don't know where my duty lays.  I
don't, reelly."

Gyp looked up then.

"The great thing is to save Daisy suffering, isn't it?"

Mr. Wagge's face wore for a moment an expression of affront, as if from
the thought: 'Sufferin'!  You must leave that to her father!' Then it
wavered; the curious, furtive warmth of the attracted male came for a
moment into his little eyes; he averted them, and coughed.  Gyp said
softly:

"To please me."

Mr. Wagge's readjusted glance stopped in confusion at her waist. He
answered, in a voice that he strove to make bland:

"If you put it in that way, I don't reelly know 'ow to refuse; but it
must be quite between you and me--I can't withdraw my attitude."

Gyp murmured:

"No, of course.  Thank you so much; and you'll let me know about
everything later.  I mustn't take up your time now."  And she held out
her hand.

Mr. Wagge took it in a lingering manner.

"Well, I HAVE an appointment," he said; "a gentleman at Campden Hill.  He
starts at twelve.  I'm never late.  GOOD-morning."

When she had watched his square, black figure pass through the outer
gate, busily rebuttoning those shining black gloves, she went upstairs
and washed her face and hands.

For several days, Fiorsen wavered; but his collapse had come just in
time, and with every hour the danger lessened.  At the end of a fortnight
of a perfectly white life, there remained nothing to do in the words of
the doctor but "to avoid all recurrence of the predisposing causes, and
shove in sea air!"  Gyp had locked up all brandy--and violins; she could
control him so long as he was tamed by his own weakness.  But she passed
some very bitter hours before she sent for her baby, Betty, and the dogs,
and definitely took up life in her little house again.  His debts had
been paid, including the thousand pounds to Rosek, and the losses of
Daphne Wing.  The girl had gone down to that cottage where no one had
ever heard of her, to pass her time in lonely grief and terror, with the
aid of a black dress and a gold band on her third finger.

August and the first half of September were spent near Bude. Fiorsen's
passion for the sea, a passion Gyp could share, kept him singularly
moderate and free from restiveness.  He had been thoroughly frightened,
and such terror is not easily forgotten. They stayed in a farmhouse,
where he was at his best with the simple folk, and his best could be
charming.  He was always trying to get his "mermaid," as he took to
calling Gyp, away from the baby, getting her away to himself, along the
grassy cliffs and among the rocks and yellow sands of that free coast.
His delight was to find every day some new nook where they could bathe,
and dry themselves by sitting in the sun.  And very like a mermaid she
was, on a seaweedy rock, with her feet close together in a little pool,
her fingers combing her drowned hair, and the sun silvering her wet body.
If she had loved him, it would have been perfect.  But though, close to
nature like this--there are men to whom towns are poison--he was so much
more easy to bear, even to like, her heart never opened to him, never
fluttered at his voice, or beat more quickly under his kisses.  One
cannot regulate these things.  The warmth in her eyes when they looked at
her baby, and the coolness when they looked at him, was such that not
even a man, and he an egoist, could help seeing; and secretly he began to
hate that tiny rival, and she began to notice that he did.

As soon as the weather broke, he grew restless, craving his violin, and
they went back to town, in robust health--all three.  During those weeks,
Gyp had never been free of the feeling that it was just a lull, of forces
held up in suspense, and the moment they were back in their house, this
feeling gathered density and darkness, as rain gathers in the sky after a
fine spell.  She had often thought of Daphne Wing, and had written twice,
getting in return one naive and pathetic answer:

'DEAR MRS. FIORSEN,

'Oh, it is kind of you to write, because I know what you must be feeling
about me; and it was so kind of you to let me come here.  I try not to
think about things, but of course I can't help it; and I don't seem to
care what happens now.  Mother is coming down here later on.  Sometimes I
lie awake all night, listening to the wind. Don't you think the wind is
the most melancholy thing in the world? I wonder if I shall die?  I hope
I shall.  Oh, I do, really!  Good-bye, dear Mrs. Fiorsen.  I shall never
forgive myself about you.

'Your grateful,
'DAPHNE WING.'

The girl had never once been mentioned between her and Fiorsen since the
night when he sat by her bed, begging forgiveness; she did not know
whether he ever gave the little dancer and her trouble a thought, or even
knew what had become of her.  But now that the time was getting near, Gyp
felt more and more every day as if she must go down and see her.  She
wrote to her father, who, after a dose of Harrogate with Aunt Rosamund,
was back at Mildenham. Winton answered that the nurse was there, and that
there seemed to be a woman, presumably the mother, staying with her, but
that he had not of course made direct inquiry.  Could not Gyp come down?
He was alone, and cubbing had begun.  It was like him to veil his
longings under such dry statements.  But the thought of giving him
pleasure, and of a gallop with hounds fortified intensely her feeling
that she ought to go.  Now that baby was so well, and Fiorsen still not
drinking, she might surely snatch this little holiday and satisfy her
conscience about the girl.  Since the return from Cornwall, she had
played for him in the music-room just as of old, and she chose the finish
of a morning practice to say:

"Gustav, I want to go to Mildenham this afternoon for a week. Father's
lonely."

He was putting away his violin, but she saw his neck grow red.

"To him?  No.  He will steal you as he stole the baby.  Let him have the
baby if he likes.  Not you.  No."

Gyp, who was standing by the piano, kept silence at this unexpected
outburst, but revolt blazed up in her.  She never asked him anything; he
should not refuse this.  He came up behind and put his arms round her.

"My Gyp, I want you here--I am lonely, too.  Don't go away."

She tried to force his arms apart, but could not, and her anger grew.
She said coldly:

"There's another reason why I must go."

"No, no!  No good reason--to take you from me."

"There is!  The girl who is just going to have your child is staying near
Mildenham, and I want to see how she is."

He let go of her then, and recoiling against the divan, sat down. And Gyp
thought: 'I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to--but it serves him right.'

He muttered, in a dull voice:

"Oh, I hoped she was dead."

"Yes!  For all you care, she might be.  I'm going, but you needn't be
afraid that I shan't come back.  I shall be back to-day week; I promise."

He looked at her fixedly.

"Yes.  You don't break your promises; you will not break it."  But,
suddenly, he said again: "Gyp, don't go!"

"I must."

He got up and caught her in his arms.

"Say you love me, then!"

But she could not.  It was one thing to put up with embraces, quite
another to pretend that.  When at last he was gone, she sat smoothing her
hair, staring before her with hard eyes, thinking: "Here--where I saw him
with that girl!  What animals men are!"

Late that afternoon, she reached Mildenham.  Winton met her at the
station.  And on the drive up, they passed the cottage where Daphne Wing
was staying.  It stood in front of a small coppice, a creepered,
plain-fronted, little brick house, with a garden still full of
sunflowers, tenanted by the old jockey, Pettance, his widowed daughter,
and her three small children.  "That talkative old scoundrel," as Winton
always called him, was still employed in the Mildenham stables, and his
daughter was laundress to the establishment.  Gyp had secured for Daphne
Wing the same free, independent, economic agent who had watched over her
own event; the same old doctor, too, was to be the presiding deity.
There were no signs of life about the cottage, and she would not stop,
too eager to be at home again, to see the old rooms, and smell the old
savour of the house, to get to her old mare, and feel its nose nuzzling
her for sugar.  It was so good to be back once more, feeling strong and
well and able to ride.  The smile of the inscrutable Markey at the front
door was a joy to her, even the darkness of the hall, where a gleam of
last sunlight fell across the skin of Winton's first tiger, on which she
had so often sunk down dead tired after hunting.  Ah, it was nice to be
at home!

In her mare's box, old Pettance was putting a last touch to cleanliness.
His shaven, skin-tight, wicked old face, smiled deeply.  He said in
honeyed tones:

"Good evenin', miss; beautiful evenin', ma'am!"  And his little burning
brown eyes, just touched by age, regarded her lovingly.

"Well, Pettance, how are you?  And how's Annie, and how are the children?
And how's this old darling?"

"Wonderful, miss; artful as a kitten.  Carry you like a bird to-morrow,
if you're goin' out."

"How are her legs?"

And while Gyp passed her hand down those iron legs, the old mare examined
her down the back of her neck.

"They 'aven't filled not once since she come in--she was out all July and
August; but I've kept 'er well at it since, in 'opes you might be
comin'."

"They feel splendid."  And, still bending down, Gyp asked: "And how is
your lodger--the young lady I sent you?"

"Well, ma'am, she's very young, and these very young ladies they get a
bit excited, you know, at such times; I should say she've never been--"
With obvious difficulty he checked the words, "to an 'orse before!"
"Well, you must expect it.  And her mother, she's a dreadful funny one,
miss.  She does needle me!  Oh, she puts my back up properly!  No class,
of course--that's where it is.  But this 'ere nurse--well, you know,
miss, she won't 'ave no nonsense; so there we are.  And, of course,
you're bound to 'ave 'ighsteria, a bit--losin' her 'usband as young as
that."

Gyp could feel his wicked old smile even before she raised herself. But
what did it matter if he did guess?  She knew he would keep a stable
secret.

"Oh, we've 'ad some pretty flirts--up and cryin', dear me!  I sleeps in
the next room--oh, yes, at night-time--when you're a widder at that age,
you can't expect nothin' else.  I remember when I was ridin' in Ireland
for Captain O'Neill, there was a young woman--"

Gyp thought: 'I mustn't let him get off--or I shall be late for dinner,'
and she said:

"Oh, Pettance, who bought the young brown horse?"

"Mr. Bryn Summer'ay, ma'am, over at Widrington, for an 'unter, and 'ack
in town, miss."

"Summerhay?  Ah!"  With a touch of the whip to her memory, Gyp recalled
the young man with the clear eyes and teasing smile, on the chestnut
mare, the bold young man who reminded her of somebody, and she added:

"That'll be a good home for him, I should think."

"Oh, yes, miss; good 'ome--nice gentleman, too.  He come over here to see
it, and asked after you.  I told 'im you was a married lady now, miss.
'Ah,' he said; 'she rode beautiful!'  And he remembered the 'orse well.
The major, he wasn't 'ere just then, so I let him try the young un; he
popped 'im over a fence or two, and when he come back he says, 'Well, I'm
goin' to have 'im.'  Speaks very pleasant, an' don't waste no time--'orse
was away before the end of the week.  Carry 'im well; 'e's a strong
rider, too, and a good plucked one, but bad 'ands, I should say."

"Yes, Pettance; I must go in now.  Will you tell Annie I shall be round
to-morrow, to see her?"

"Very good, miss.  'Ounds meets at Filly Cross, seven-thirty. You'll be
goin' out?"

"Rather.  Good-night."

Flying back across the yard, Gyp thought: "'She rode beautiful!' How
jolly!  I'm glad he's got my horse."


XXI

Still glowing from her morning in the saddle, Gyp started out next day at
noon on her visit to the "old scoundrel's" cottage.  It was one of those
lingering mellow mornings of late September, when the air, just warmed
through, lifts off the stubbles, and the hedgerows are not yet dried of
dew.  The short cut led across two fields, a narrow strip of village
common, where linen was drying on gorse bushes coming into bloom, and one
field beyond; she met no one. Crossing the road, she passed into the
cottage-garden, where sunflowers and Michaelmas daisies in great
profusion were tangled along the low red-brick garden-walls, under some
poplar trees yellow-flecked already.  A single empty chair, with a book
turned face downward, stood outside an open window.  Smoke wreathing from
one chimney was the only sign of life.  But, standing undecided before
the half-open door, Gyp was conscious, as it were, of too much stillness,
of something unnatural about the silence.  She was just raising her hand
to knock when she heard the sound of smothered sobbing.  Peeping through
the window, she could just see a woman dressed in green, evidently Mrs.
Wagge, seated at a table, crying into her handkerchief.  At that very
moment, too, a low moaning came from the room above.  Gyp recoiled; then,
making up her mind, she went in and knocked at the room where the woman
in green was sitting.  After fully half a minute, it was opened, and Mrs.
Wagge stood there.  The nose and eyes and cheeks of that thinnish, acid
face were red, and in her green dress, and with her greenish hair (for it
was going grey and she put on it a yellow lotion smelling of
cantharides), she seemed to Gyp just like one of those green apples that
turn reddish so unnaturally in the sun. She had rubbed over her face,
which shone in streaks, and her handkerchief was still crumpled in her
hand.  It was horrible to come, so fresh and glowing, into the presence
of this poor woman, evidently in bitter sorrow.  And a desperate desire
came over Gyp to fly.  It seemed dreadful for anyone connected with him
who had caused this trouble to be coming here at all.  But she said as
softly as she could:

"Mrs. Wagge?  Please forgive me--but is there any news?  I am--It was I
who got Daphne down here."

The woman before her was evidently being torn this way and that, but at
last she answered, with a sniff:

"It--it--was born this morning--dead."  Gyp gasped.  To have gone through
it all for that!  Every bit of mother-feeling in her rebelled and
sorrowed; but her reason said: Better so!  Much better!  And she
murmured:

"How is she?"

Mrs. Wagge answered, with profound dejection:

"Bad--very bad.  I don't know I'm sure what to say--my feelings are all
anyhow, and that's the truth.  It's so dreadfully upsetting altogether."

"Is my nurse with her?"

"Yes; she's there.  She's a very headstrong woman, but capable, I don't
deny.  Daisy's very weak.  Oh, it IS upsetting!  And now I suppose
there'll have to be a burial.  There really seems no end to it.  And all
because of--of that man."  And Mrs. Wagge turned away again to cry into
her handkerchief.

Feeling she could never say or do the right thing to the poor lady, Gyp
stole out.  At the bottom of the stairs, she hesitated whether to go up
or no.  At last, she mounted softly.  It must be in the front room that
the bereaved girl was lying--the girl who, but a year ago, had debated
with such naive self-importance whether or not it was her duty to take a
lover.  Gyp summoned courage to tap gently.  The economic agent opened
the door an inch, but, seeing who it was, slipped her robust and handsome
person through into the corridor.

"You, my dear!" she said in a whisper.  "That's nice!"

"How is she?"

"Fairly well--considering.  You know about it?"

"Yes; can I see her?"

"I hardly think so.  I can't make her out.  She's got no spirit, not an
ounce.  She doesn't want to get well, I believe.  It's the man, I
expect."  And, looking at Gyp with her fine blue eyes, she asked: "Is
that it?  Is he tired of her?"

Gyp met her gaze better than she had believed possible.

"Yes, nurse."

The economic agent swept her up and down.  "It's a pleasure to look at
you.  You've got quite a colour, for you.  After all, I believe it MIGHT
do her good to see you.  Come in!"

Gyp passed in behind her, and stood gazing, not daring to step forward.
What a white face, with eyes closed, with fair hair still damp on the
forehead, with one white hand lying on the sheet above her heart!  What a
frail madonna of the sugar-plums!  On the whole of that bed the only
colour seemed the gold hoop round the wedding-finger.

The economic agent said very quietly:

"Look, my dear; I've brought you a nice visitor."

Daphne Wing's eyes and lips opened and closed again.  And the awful
thought went through Gyp: 'Poor thing!  She thought it was going to be
him, and it's only me!'  Then the white lips said:

"Oh, Mrs. Fiorsen, it's you--it is kind of you!"  And the eyes opened
again, but very little, and differently.

The economic agent slipped away.  Gyp sat down by the bed and timidly
touched the hand.

Daphne Wing looked at her, and two tears slowly ran down her cheeks.

"It's over," she said just audibly, "and there's nothing now--it was
dead, you know.  I don't want to live.  Oh, Mrs. Fiorsen, why can't they
let me die, too?"

Gyp bent over and kissed the hand, unable to bear the sight of those two
slowly rolling tears.  Daphne Wing went on:

"You ARE good to me.  I wish my poor little baby hadn't--"

Gyp, knowing her own tears were wetting that hand, raised herself and
managed to get out the words:

"Bear up!  Think of your work!"

"Dancing!  Ho!"  She gave the least laugh ever heard.  "It seems so long
ago."

"Yes; but now it'll all come back to you again, better than ever."

Daphne Wing answered by a feeble sigh.

There was silence.  Gyp thought: 'She's falling asleep.'

With eyes and mouth closed like that, and all alabaster white, the face
was perfect, purged of its little commonnesses.  Strange freak that this
white flower of a face could ever have been produced by Mr. and Mrs.
Wagge!

Daphne Wing opened her eyes and said:

"Oh!  Mrs. Fiorsen, I feel so weak.  And I feel much more lonely now.
There's nothing anywhere."

Gyp got up; she felt herself being carried into the mood of the girl's
heart, and was afraid it would be seen.  Daphne Wing went on:

"Do you know, when nurse said she'd brought a visitor, I thought it was
him; but I'm glad now.  If he had looked at me like he did--I couldn't
have borne it."

Gyp bent down and put her lips to the damp forehead.  Faint, very faint,
there was still the scent of orange-blossom.

When she was once more in the garden, she hurried away; but instead of
crossing the fields again, turned past the side of the cottage into the
coppice behind.  And, sitting down on a log, her hands pressed to her
cheeks and her elbows to her breast, she stared at the sunlit bracken and
the flies chasing each other over it.  Love! Was it always something
hateful and tragic that spoiled lives? Criss-cross!  One darting on
another, taking her almost before she knew she was seized, then darting
away and leaving her wanting to be seized again.  Or darting on her, who,
when seized, was fatal to the darter, yet had never wanted to be seized.
Or darting one on the other for a moment, then both breaking away too
soon.  Did never two dart at each other, seize, and cling, and ever after
be one?  Love!  It had spoiled her father's life, and Daphne Wing's;
never came when it was wanted; always came when it was not. Malevolent
wanderer, alighting here, there; tiring of the spirit before it tired of
the body; or of the body before it tired of the spirit.  Better to have
nothing to do with it--far better!  If one never loved, one would never
feel lonely--like that poor girl.  And yet!  No--there was no "and yet."
Who that was free would wish to become a slave?  A slave--like Daphne
Wing!  A slave--like her own husband to his want of a wife who did not
love him.  A slave like her father had been--still was, to a memory.  And
watching the sunlight on the bracken, Gyp thought: 'Love!  Keep far from
me.  I don't want you.  I shall never want you!'

Every morning that week she made her way to the cottage, and every
morning had to pass through the hands of Mrs. Wagge.  The good lady had
got over the upsetting fact that Gyp was the wife of that villain, and
had taken a fancy to her, confiding to the economic agent, who confided
it to Gyp, that she was "very distangey--and such pretty eyes, quite
Italian."  She was one of those numberless persons whose passion for
distinction was just a little too much for their passionate propriety.
It was that worship of distinction which had caused her to have her young
daughter's talent for dancing fostered.  Who knew to what it might lead
in these days? At great length she explained to Gyp the infinite care
with which she had always "brought Daisy up like a lady--and now this is
the result."  And she would look piercingly at Gyp's hair or ears, at her
hands or her instep, to see how it was done.  The burial worried her
dreadfully.  "I'm using the name of Daisy Wing; she was christened
'Daisy' and the Wing's professional, so that takes them both in, and it's
quite the truth.  But I don't think anyone would connect it, would they?
About the father's name, do you think I might say the late Mr. Joseph
Wing, this once?  You see, it never was alive, and I must put something
if they're not to guess the truth, and that I couldn't bear; Mr. Wagge
would be so distressed. It's in his own line, you see.  Oh, it is
upsetting!"

Gyp murmured desperately:

"Oh! yes, anything."

Though the girl was so deathly white and spiritless, it soon became clear
that she was going to pull through.  With each day, a little more colour
and a little more commonness came back to her.  And Gyp felt
instinctively that she would, in the end, return to Fulham purged of her
infatuation, a little harder, perhaps a little deeper.

Late one afternoon toward the end of her week at Mildenham, Gyp wandered
again into the coppice, and sat down on that same log.  An hour before
sunset, the light shone level on the yellowing leaves all round her; a
startled rabbit pelted out of the bracken and pelted back again, and,
from the far edge of the little wood, a jay cackled harshly, shifting its
perch from tree to tree.  Gyp thought of her baby, and of that which
would have been its half-brother; and now that she was so near having to
go back to Fiorsen, she knew that she had not been wise to come here.  To
have been in contact with the girl, to have touched, as it were, that
trouble, had made the thought of life with him less tolerable even than
it was before.  Only the longing to see her baby made return seem
possible.  Ah, well--she would get used to it all again!  But the
anticipation of his eyes fixed on her, then sliding away from the meeting
with her eyes, of all--of all that would begin again, suddenly made her
shiver.  She was very near to loathing at that moment.  He, the father of
her baby!  The thought seemed ridiculous and strange.  That little
creature seemed to bind him to her no more than if it were the offspring
of some chance encounter, some pursuit of nymph by faun.  No!  It was
hers alone.  And a sudden feverish longing to get back to it overpowered
all other thought. This longing grew in her so all night that at
breakfast she told her father.  Swallowing down whatever his feeling may
have been, he said:

"Very well, my child; I'll come up with you."

Putting her into the cab in London, he asked:

"Have you still got your key of Bury Street?  Good!  Remember, Gyp--any
time day or night--there it is for you."

She had wired to Fiorsen from Mildenham that she was coming, and she
reached home soon after three.  He was not in, and what was evidently her
telegram lay unopened in the hall.  Tremulous with expectation, she ran
up to the nursery.  The pathetic sound of some small creature that cannot
tell what is hurting it, or why, met her ears.  She went in, disturbed,
yet with the half-triumphant thought: 'Perhaps that's for me!'

Betty, very flushed, was rocking the cradle, and examining the baby's
face with a perplexed frown.  Seeing Gyp, she put her hand to her side,
and gasped:

"Oh, be joyful!  Oh, my dear!  I AM glad.  I can't do anything with baby
since the morning.  Whenever she wakes up, she cries like that.  And till
to-day she's been a little model.  Hasn't she! There, there!"

Gyp took up the baby, whose black eyes fixed themselves on her mother in
a momentary contentment; but, at the first movement, she began again her
fretful plaint.  Betty went on:

