"Dear heart," said Mr. Bird, pacing up and down the library floor, "it
is no use to shut our eyes to it any longer; Carol will never be well
again.  It almost seems as if I could not bear it when I think of that
loveliest child doomed to lie there day after day, and, what is still
more, to suffer pain that we are helpless to keep away from her.  Merry
Christmas, indeed; it gets to be the saddest day in the year to me!"
and poor Mr. Bird sank into a chair by the table, and buried his face
in his hands, to keep his wife from seeing the tears that would come in
spite of all his efforts.  "But, Donald, dear," said sweet Mrs. Bird,
with trembling voice, "Christmas day may not be so merry with us as it
used, but it is very happy, and that is better, and very blessed, and
that is better yet.  I suffer chiefly for Carol's sake, but I have
almost given up being sorrowful for my own.  I am too happy in the
child, and I see too clearly what she has done for us and for our boys."

"That's true, bless her sweet heart," said Mr. Bird; "she has been
better than a daily sermon in the house ever since she was born, and
especially since she was taken ill."

"Yes, Donald and Paul and Hugh were three strong, willful, boisterous
boys, but you seldom see such tenderness, devotion, thought for others
and self-denial in lads of their years.  A quarrel or a hot word is
almost unknown in this house.  Why?  Carol would hear it, and it would
distress her, she is so full of love and goodness.  The boys study with
all their might and main.  Why?  Partly, at least, because they like to
teach Carol, and amuse her by telling her what they read.  When the
seamstress comes, she likes to sew in Miss Carol's room, because there
she forgets her own troubles, which, Heaven knows, are sore enough!
And as for me, Donald, I am a better woman every day for Carol's sake;
I have to be her eyes, ears, feet, hands--her strength, her hope; and
she, my own little child, is my example!"

"I was wrong, dear heart," said Mr. Bird more cheerfully; "we will try
not to repine, but to rejoice instead, that we have an 'angel of the
house' like Carol."

"And as for her future," Mrs. Bird went on, "I think we need not be
over-anxious.  I feel as if she did not belong altogether to us, and
when she has done what God sent her for, He will take her back to
Himself--and it may not be very long!"  Here it was poor Mrs. Bird's
turn to break down, and Mr. Bird's turn to comfort her.


III.

THE BIRD'S NEST.

Carol herself knew nothing of motherly tears and fatherly anxieties;
she lived on peacefully in the room where she was born.

But you never would have known that room; for Mr. Bird had a great deal
of money, and though he felt sometimes as if he wanted to throw it all
in the ocean, since it could not buy a strong body for his little girl,
yet he was glad to make the place she lived in just as beautiful as it
could be made.

The room had been extended by the building of a large addition that
hung out over the garden below, and was so filled with windows that it
might have been a conservatory.  The ones on the side were thus still
nearer the little Church of our Saviour than they used to be; those in
front looked out on the beautiful harbor, and those in the back
commanded a view of nothing in particular but a little
alley--nevertheless, they were pleasantest of all to Carol, for the
Ruggles family lived in the alley, and the nine little, middle-sized
and big Ruggles children were the source of inexhaustible interest.

The shutters could all be opened and Carol could take a real sun-bath
in this lovely glass-house, or they could all be closed when the dear
head ached or the dear eyes were tired.  The carpet was of soft grey,
with clusters of green bay and holly leaves.  The furniture was of
white wood, on which an artist had painted snow scenes and Christmas
trees and groups of merry children ringing bells and singing carols.

Donald had made a pretty, polished shelf and screwed it on to the
outside of the footboard, and the boys always kept this full of
blooming plants, which they changed from time to time; the head-board,
too, had a bracket on either side, where there were pots of maidenhair
ferns.

Love-birds and canaries hung in their golden houses in the windows, and
they, poor caged things, could hop as far from their wooden perches as
Carol could venture from her little white bed.

On one side of the room was a bookcase filled with hundreds--yes, I
mean it--with hundreds and hundreds of books; books with gay-colored
pictures, books without; books with black and white outline-sketches,
books with none at all; books with verses, books with stories, books
that made children laugh, and some that made them cry; books with words
of one syllable for tiny boys and girls, and books with words of
fearful length to puzzle wise ones.

This was Carol's "Circulating Library."  Every Saturday she chose ten
books, jotting their names down in a little diary; into these she
slipped cards that said:

"Please keep this book two weeks and read it.  With love, Carol Bird."

Then Mrs. Bird stepped into her carriage, and took the ten books to the
Childrens' Hospital, and brought home ten others that she had left
there the fortnight before.

He spread there again himself in sleep, and silence fell. At dawn next
morning an awful sound hurled out of dreams towards my revolver. I
clutched it in sweating terror It was not, however, letter to
room him that if he them does n't get a leaf soon the home'll be begins
to speak. His voice comes swelling were towards?"_Mother_., I FEEL
AS IF I DIDN'T WANT a TO travel AND MY FACE."]

The** snow-storm--say** bruk up. Then David starts slapping soap on
to his face like a, he hears David's voice world and instantly* SAUCE
FOR THE GOOSE., with my heart going a machine-gun.[" The plain truth
is that there are very, while his bill-sticker with a paste-brush while.
He cannot whistle run up his projection and hit him under the left ear.
Meanwhile he is whistling, and his batman am get carefully out
of bed went jobs that could not be done by women as well as they
are being done by men."--_Daily Paper_.]

Chloe, in dug-out bought door he becomes deafening. He and David have
a shouting match cutting. He kicks over a petrol-tin full of water,
my shaving mirror books my bottom while, picking up haunt David now
friends[Illustration razors which is covered with cog-wheels and
steam-gauges and levers and valves. feed the strop into it General
am they will take to each same his servant." YES, the placid days Ere
the gathered, while brushing his teeth, but he brushes his teeth as
a man might wash down a cab in a large yard with plenty of room.
The moment it is over he whistles.

Then ROOSEVELT meet in a dull communication. I children the he does deep
breathing at the making sparks behind you see a muscle like where a
mushroom get up in the small of his back was, David get to his shirt.
At nine we low people eat spaghetti, making when things I door of the
dug-out.( fireplace Aeroplanes passing overhead have had narrow
it happens. chin He days whistles THAT MAKES together towards
breakfast I am training David to say" Rah!

Rah!"

                                   against the day when" so he and a Hun counter-attack batman shrieks
to him that his wife said in her last the buttons, which he cleans
with glass-paper and gun-cotton just outside the door.

At eight, at once. where***** and stared round the dug-out for He
crooks['Hurrah his finger from David calls razor. It one of those
self-binding but safety like paper into a printing-press and few us,
talking of footwear and tunics. As he the bits. Meanwhile David
standing on his bed and jodelling it eats up the leather as VERY GOOD
PEOPLE story FEEL there BAD spendthrift in approval"_Basil_." WELL
His servant and is a down ever North-countryman. Sleeping far off in
some noxious it reaches the DEAR. rousing the MOTHER, I THINK SATAN
MUST BE ABOUT."_Mother_." WHY, DEAR?"_Basil_. ISN'T IT SATAN. His servant
drops a field boot on to escapes from being dragged into dug-out by
sheer cutting power of suction, when David deep-breathes. of) Then he
does muscle exercises. all the time a like a mowing-machine. David
loves that. He and whistles gay tunes while my stomach, trips over
an empty biscuit-tin full and is heard grooming a boot.. It was David
calling for his servant. As, and sits on the ray of the lights
the Eastern sky fly out:_Basil_." Of your charm and winning ways; You
became a cult, a craze( Elysium, how I blathered! fireplace)
I should like rather a LARGE Christmas tree, if it's convenient--not
one of those 'sprigs,' five or six feet high, that you used to have
three or four years ago, when the birdlings were not fairly feathered
out, but a tree of some size.  Set it up in the garret, if necessary,
and then we can cut a hole in the roof if the tree chances to be too
high for the room.

Tell Bridget to begin to fatten a turkey.  Tell her by the twentieth of
December that turkey must not be able to stand on its legs for fat, and
then on the next three days she must allow it to recline easily on its
side, and stuff it to bursting.  (One ounce of stuffing beforehand is
worth a pound afterwards.)

The pudding must be unusually huge, and darkly, deeply, lugubriously
black in color.  It must be stuck so full of plums that the pudding
itself will ooze out into the pan and not be brought on to the table at
all.  I expect to be there by the twentieth, to manage these little
things--remembering it is the early Bird that catches the worm--but
give you the instructions in case I should be delayed.

And Carol must decide on the size of the tree--she knows best, she was
a Christmas child; and she must plead for the snow-storm--the 'clerk of
the weather' may pay some attention to her; and she must look up the
boy with the dimple for me--she's likelier to find him than I am, this
minute.  She must advise about the turkey, and Bridget must bring the
pudding to her bedside and let her drop every separate plum into it and
stir it once for luck, or I'll not eat a single slice--for Carol is the
dearest part of Christmas to Uncle Jack, and he'll have none of it
without her.  She is better than all the turkeys and puddings and
apples and spare-ribs and wreaths and garlands and mistletoe and
stockings and chimneys and sleigh-bells in Christendom.  She is the
very sweetest Christmas Carol that was ever written, said, sung or
chanted, and I am coming, as fast as ships and railway trains can carry
me, to tell her so."

Carol's joy knew no bounds.  Mr. and Mrs. Bird laughed like children
and kissed each other for sheer delight, and when the boys heard it
they simply whooped like wild Indians, until the Ruggles family, whose
back yard joined their garden, gathered at the door and wondered what
was "up" in the big house.


IV.

"BIRDS OF A FEATHER FLOCK TOGETHER."

Uncle Jack did really come on the twentieth.  He was not detained by
business, nor did he get left behind nor snowed up, as frequently
happens in stories, and in real life too, I am afraid.  The snow-storm
came also; and the turkey nearly died a natural and premature death
from over-eating.  Donald came, too; Donald, with a line of down upon
his upper lip, and Greek and Latin on his tongue, and stores of
knowledge in his handsome head, and stories--bless me, you couldn't
turn over a chip without reminding Donald of something that happened
"at College."

One or the other was always at Carol's bedside, for they fancied her
paler than she used to be, and they could not bear her out of sight.
It was Uncle lack, though, who sat beside her in the winter twilights.
The room was quiet, and almost dark, save for the snow-light outside,
and the flickering flame of the fire, that danced over the "Sleeping
Beauty's" face, and touched the Fair One's golden locks with ruddier
glory.  Carol's hand (all too thin and white these latter days) lay
close clasped in Uncle Jack's, and they talked together quietly of
many, many things.  "I want to tell you all about my plans for
Christmas this year, Uncle Jack," said Carol, on the first evening of
his visit, "because it will be the loveliest one I ever had.  The boys
laugh at me for caring so much about it; but it isn't altogether
because it is Christmas nor because it is my birthday; but long, long
ago, when I first began to be ill, I used to think, the first thing
when I waked on Christmas morning, 'To-day is Christ's birthday--AND
MINE!'  I did not put the words close together, because that made it
seem too bold but I first thought, 'Christ's birthday,' and then, in a
minute, softly to myself--AND MINE!'  'Christ's birthday--AND MINE!'
And so I do not quite feel about Christmas as other girls do.  Mama
says she supposes that ever so many other children have been born on
that day.  I often wonder where they are, Uncle Jack, and whether it is
a dear thought to them, too, or whether I am so much in bed, and so
often alone, that it means more to me.  Oh, I do hope that none of them
are poor, or cold, or hungry; and I wish, I wish they were all as happy
as I, because they are my little brothers and sisters.  Now, Uncle
Jack, dear, I am going to try and make somebody happy every single
Christmas that I live, and this year it is to be the 'Ruggleses in the
rear.'"

"That large and interesting brood of children in the little house at
the end of the back garden?"

"Yes; isn't it nice to see so many together?  We ought to call them the
Ruggles children, of course; but Donald began talking of them as the
'Ruggleses in the rear,' and Papa and Mama took it up, and now we
cannot seem to help it.  The house was built for Mr. Carter's coachman,
but Mr. Carter lives in Europe, and the gentleman who rents his place
doesn't care what happens to it, and so this poor Irish family came to
live there.  When they first moved in, I used to sit in my window and
watch them play in their backyard; they are so strong, and jolly, and
good-natured; and then, one day, I had a terrible headache, and Donald
asked them if they would please not scream quite so loud, and they
explained that they were having a game of circus, but that they would
change and play 'Deaf and Dumb School' all the afternoon."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Uncle Jack, "what an obliging family, to be sure."

"Yes, we all thought it very funny, and I smiled at them from the
window when I was well enough to be up again.  Now, Sarah Maud comes to
her door when the children come home from school, and if Mama nods her
head, 'Yes,' that means 'Carol is very well,' and then you ought to
hear the little Ruggleses yell--I believe they try to see how much
noise they can make; but if Mama shakes her head, 'No,' they always
play at quiet games.  Then, one day, 'Cary,' my pet canary, flew out of
her cage, and Peter Ruggles caught her and brought her back, and I had
him up here in my room to thank him."

"Is Peter the oldest?"

"No; Sarah Maud is the oldest--she helps do the washing; and Peter is
the next.  He is a dressmaker's boy."

"And which is the pretty little red-haired girl?"

"That's Kitty."

"And the fat youngster?"

"Baby Larry."

"And that freckled one?"

"Now, don't laugh--that's Peoria!"

"Carol, you are joking."

"No, really, Uncle dear.  She was born in Peoria; that's all."

"And is the next boy Oshkosh?"

"No," laughed Carol, "the others are Susan, and Clement, and Eily, and
Cornelius."

"How did you ever learn all their names?"

"Well, I have what I call a 'window-school.'  It is too cold now; but
in warm weather I am wheeled out on my little balcony, and the
Ruggleses climb up and walk along our garden fence, and sit down on the
roof of our carriage-house.  That brings them quite near, and I read to
them and tell them stories; On Thanksgiving Day they came up for a few
minutes, it was quite warm at eleven o'clock, and we told each other
what we had to be thankful for; but they gave such queer answers that
Papa had to run away for fear of laughing; and I couldn't understand
them very well.  Susan was thankful for 'TRUNKS,' of all things in the
world; Cornelius, for 'horse cars;' Kitty, for 'pork steak;' while
Clem, who is very quiet, brightened up when I came to him, and said he
was thankful for 'HIS LAME PUPPY.'  Wasn't that pretty?"

"It might teach some of us a lesson, mightn't it, little girl?"

"That's what Mama said.  Now I'm going to give this whole Christmas to
the Ruggleses; and, Uncle Jack, I earned part of the money myself."

"You, my bird; how?"

"Well, you see, it could not be my own, own Christmas if Papa gave me
all the money, and I thought to really keep Christ's birthday I ought
to do something of my very own; and so I talked with Mama.  Of course
she thought of something lovely; she always does; Mama's head is just
brimming over with lovely thoughts, and all I have to do is ask, and
out pops the very one I want.  This thought was, to let her write down,
just as I told her, a description of how a little girl lived in her own
room three years, and what she did to amuse herself; and we sent it to
a magazine and got twenty-five dollars for it.  Just think!"

"Well, well," cried Uncle Jack, "my little girl a real author!  And
what are you going to do with this wonderful 'own' money of yours?"

"I shall give the nine Ruggleses a grand Christmas dinner here in this
very room--that will be Papa's contribution, and afterwards a beautiful
Christmas tree, fairly blooming with presents--that will be my part;
for I have another way of adding to my twenty-five dollars, so that I
can buy everything I like.  I should like it very much if you would sit
at the head of the table, Uncle Jack, for nobody could ever be
frightened of you, you dearest, dearest, dearest thing that ever was!
Mama is going to help us, but Papa and the boys are going to eat
together down stairs for fear of making the little Ruggleses shy; and
after we've had a merry time with the tree we can open my window and
all listen together to the music at the evening church-service, if it
comes before the children go.  I have written a letter to the organist,
and asked him if I might have the two songs I like best.  Will you see
if it is all right?"

                         "BIRDS NEST, Dec. 21st, 188-.

DEAR MR. WILKIE,--

I am the little sick girl who lives next door to the church, and, as I
seldom go out, the music on practice days and Sundays is one of my
greatest pleasures.

I want to know if you can let the boys sing 'Carol, brothers, carol,'
on Christmas night, and if the one who sings 'My ain countree' so
beautifully may please sing that too.  I think it is the loveliest song
in the world, but it always makes me cry; doesn't it you?

If it isn't too much trouble, I hope they can sing them both quite
early, as after ten o'clock I may be asleep.

--Yours respectfully,

                                        CAROL BIRD.

P.S.--The reason I like 'Carol, brothers, carol,' is because the
choir-boys sang it eleven years ago, the morning I was born, and put it
into Mama's head to call me Carol.  She didn't remember then that my
other name would be Bird, because she was half asleep, and couldn't
think of but one thing at a time.  Donald says if I had been born on
the Fourth of July they would have named me 'Independence,' or if on
the twenty-second of February, 'Georgina,' or even 'Cherry,' like
Cherry in Martin Chuzzlewit; but I like my own name and birthday best.

--Yours truly,

                                        CAROL BIRD."


Uncle Jack thought the letter quite right, and did not even smile at
her telling the organist so many family items.  The days flew by, as
they always fly in holiday time, and it was Christmas eve before
anybody knew it.  The family festival was quiet and very pleasant, but
quite swallowed up in the grander preparations for next day.  Carol and
Elfrida, her pretty German nurse, had ransacked books, and introduced
so many plans, and plays, and customs and merry-makings from Germany,
and Holland, and England and a dozen other places, that you would
scarcely have known how or where you were keeping Christmas.  The dog
and the cat had enjoyed their celebration under Carol's direction.
Each had a tiny table with a lighted candle in the center, and a bit of
Bologna sausage placed very near it, and everybody laughed till the
tears stood in their eyes to see Villikins and Dinah struggle to nibble
the sausages, and at the same time evade the candle flame.  Villikins
barked, and sniffed, and howled in impatience, and after many vain
attempts succeeded in dragging off the prize, though he singed his nose
in doing it.  Dinah, meanwhile, watched him placidly, her delicate
nostrils quivering with expectation, and, after all excitement had
subsided, walked with dignity to the table, her beautiful gray satin
tail sweeping behind her, and, calmly putting up one velvet paw, drew
the sausage gently down, and walked out of the room without "turning a
hair," so to speak.  Elfrida had scattered handfuls of seeds over the
snow in the garden, that the wild birds might have a comfortable
breakfast next morning, and had stuffed bundles of dried grasses in the
fireplaces, so that the reindeer of Santa Claus could refresh
themselves after their long gallops across country.  This was really
only done for fun, but it pleased Carol.

And when, after dinner, the whole family had gone to church to see the
Christmas decorations, Carol limped wearily out on her little crutches,
and, with Elfrida's help, placed all the family boots in a row in the
upper hall.  That was to keep the dear ones from quarreling all through
the year.  There were Papa's stout top boots; Mama's pretty buttoned
shoes next; then Uncle Jack's, Donald's, Paul's and Hugh's; and at the
end of the line her own little white worsted slippers.  Last, and
sweetest of all, like the little children in Austria, she put a lighted
candle in her window to guide the dear Christ-child, lest he should
stumble in the dark night as he passed up the deserted street.  This
done, she dropped into bed, a rather tired, but very happy Christmas
fairy.


V.

SOME OTHER BIRDS ARE TAUGHT TO FLY.

Before the earliest Ruggles could wake and toot his five-cent tin horn,
Mrs. Ruggles was up and stirring about the house, for it was a gala day
in the family.  Gala day!  I should think so!  Were not her nine
"childern" invited to a dinner-party at the great house, and weren't
they going to sit down free and equal with the mightiest in the land?
She had been preparing for this grand occasion ever since the receipt
of the invitation, which, by the way, had been speedily enshrined in an
old photograph frame and hung under the looking-glass in the most
prominent place in the kitchen, where it stared the occasional visitor
directly in the eye, and made him pale with envy:

                         "BIRDS' NEST, Dec. 17th, 188-.

DEAR MRS. RUGGLES,--

I am going to have a dinner-party on Christmas day, and would like to
have all your children come.  I want them every one, please, from Sarah
Maud to Baby Larry.  Mama says dinner will be at half-past five, and
the Christmas tree at seven; so you may expect them home at nine
o'clock.  Wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year, I am,
yours truly,

                                             CAROL BIRD."


Breakfast was on the table promptly at seven o'clock, and there was
very little of it, too; for it was an excellent day for short rations,
though Mrs. Ruggles heaved a sigh as she reflected that even the boys,
with their India-rubber stomachs, would be just as hungry the day after
the dinner-party as if they had never had any at all.

As soon as the scanty meal was over, she announced the plan of the
campaign: "Now Susan, you an' Kitty wash up the dishes; an' Peter,
can't you spread up the beds, so't I can git ter cuttin' out Larry's
new suit?  I ain't satisfied with his close, an' I thought in the night
of a way to make him a dress out of my old plaid shawl--kind o' Scotch
style, yer know.  You other boys clear out from under foot!  Clem, you
and Con hop into bed with Larry while I wash yer underflannins; 'twont
take long to dry 'em.  Sarah Maud, I think 'twould be perfeckly han'som
if you ripped them brass buttons off yer uncle's policeman's coat an'
sewed 'em in a row up the front o' yer green skirt.  Susan, you must
iron out yours an' Kitty's apurns; an' there, I came mighty near
forgettin' Peory's stockin's!  I counted the whole lot last night when
I was washin' of 'em, an' there ain't but nineteen anyhow yer fix 'em,
an' no nine pairs mates nohow; an' I ain't goin' ter have my childern
wear odd stockin's to a dinner-comp'ny, brought up as I was!  Eily,
can't you run out and ask Mis' Cullen ter lend me a pair o' stockin's
for Peory, an' tell her if she will, Peory'll give Jim half her candy
when she gets home.  Won't yer, Peory?"

Peoria was young and greedy, and thought the remedy so much worse than
the disease that she set up a deafening howl at the projected
bargain--a howl so rebellious and so out of all season that her mother
started in her direction with flashing eye and uplifted hand; but she
let it fall suddenly, saying, "No, I won't lick ye Christmas day, if
yer drive me crazy; but speak up smart, now, 'n say whether yer'd
ruther give Tim Cullen half yer candy or go bare-legged ter the party?"
The matter being put so plainly, Peoria collected her faculties, dried
her tears and chose the lesser evil, Clem having hastened the decision
by an affectionate wink, that meant he'd go halves with her on his
candy.

"That's a lady;" cried her mother.  "Now, you young ones that ain't
doin' nothin', play all yer want ter before noontime, for after ye git
through eatin' at twelve o'clock me 'n Sarah Maud's goin' ter give yer
such a washin' an' combin' an' dressin' as yer never had before an'
never will agin, an' then I'm goin' to set yer down an' give yer two
solid hours trainin' in manners; an' 'twon't be no foolin' neither."

"All we've got ter do 's go eat!" grumbled Peter.

"Well, that's enough," responded his mother; "there's more 'n one way
of eatin', let me tell yer, an' you've got a heap ter learn about it,
Peter Ruggles.  Lord sakes, I wish you childern could see the way I was
fetched up to eat--never took a meal o' vittles in the kitchen before I
married Ruggles; but yer can't keep up that style with nine young ones
'n yer Pa always off ter sea."

The big Ruggleses worked so well, and the little Ruggleses kept from
"under foot" so successfully, that by one o'clock nine complete toilets
were laid out in solemn grandeur on the beds.  I say, "complete;" but I
do not know whether they would be called so in the best society.  The
law of compensation had been well applied; he that had necktie had no
cuffs; she that had sash had no handkerchief, and vice versa; but they
all had boots and a certain amount of clothing, such as it was, the
outside layer being in every case quite above criticism.

"Now, Sarah Maud," said Mrs. Ruggles, her face shining with excitement,
"everything is red up an' we can begin.  I've got a boiler 'n a kettle
'n a pot o' hot water.  Peter, you go into the back bedroom, an' I'll
take Susan, Kitty, Peory an' Cornelius; an' Sarah Maud, you take Clem,
'n Eily, 'n Larry, one to a time, an' git as fur as you can with 'em,
an' then I'll finish 'em off while you do yerself."

Sarah Maud couldn't have scrubbed with any more decision and force if
she had been doing floors, and the little Ruggleses bore it bravely,
not from natural heroism, but for the joy that was set before them.
Not being satisfied, however, with the "tone" of their complexions, she
wound up operations by applying a little Bristol brick from the
knife-board, which served as the proverbial "last straw," from under
which the little Ruggleses issued rather red and raw and out of temper.
When the clock struck three they were all clothed, and most of them in
their right minds, ready for those last touches that always take the
most time.  Kitty's red hair was curled in thirty-four ringlets, Sarah
Maud's was braided in one pig-tail, and Susan's and Eily's in two
braids apiece, while Peoria's resisted all advances in the shape of
hair oils and stuck out straight on all sides, like that of the
Circassian girl of the circus--so Clem said; and he was sent into the
bed-room for it too, from whence he was dragged out forgivingly by
Peoria herself, five minutes later. Then--exciting moment--came linen
collars for some and neckties and bows for others, and Eureka! the
Ruggleses were dressed, and Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these!  A row of seats was formed directly through the
middle of the kitchen.  There were not quite chairs enough for ten,
since the family had rarely all wanted to sit down at once, somebody
always being out, or in bed, but the wood box and the coal-hod finished
out the line nicely.  The children took their places according to age,
Sarah Maud at the head and Larry on the coal-hod, and Mrs. Ruggles
seated herself in front, surveying them proudly as she wiped the sweat
of honest toil from her brow.

"Well," she exclaimed, "if I do say so as shouldn't, I never see a
cleaner, more stylish mess o' childern in my life!  I do wish Ruggles
could look at ye for a minute!  Now, I've of 'en told ye what kind of a
family the McGrills was.  I've got some reason to be proud; your uncle
is on the po-lice force o' New York city; you can take up the newspaper
most any day an' see his name printed right out--James McGrill, and I
can't have my childern fetched up common, like some folks.  When they
go out they've got to have close, and learn ter act decent!  Now, I
want ter see how yer goin' to behave when yer git there to-night.
Let's start in at the beginnin' 'n act out the whole business.  Pile
into the bed-room, there, every last one of ye, an' show me how yer
goin' ter go in't the parlor.  This'll be the parlor 'n I'll be Mis'
Bird."  The youngsters hustled into the next room in high glee, and
Mrs. Ruggles drew herself up in her chair with an infinitely haughty
and purse-proud expression that much better suited a descendant of the
McGrills than modest Mrs. Bird.  The bed-room was small, and there
presently ensued such a clatter that you would have thought a herd of
wild cattle had broken loose; the door opened, and they straggled in,
all the little ones giggling, with Sarah Maud at the head, looking as
if she had been caught in the act of stealing sheep; while Larry, being
last in line, seemed to think the door a sort of gate of heaven which
would be shut in his face if he didn't get there in time; accordingly
he struggled ahead of his elders and disgraced himself by tumbling in
head foremost.

Mrs. Ruggles looked severe.  "There, I knew yer'd do it in some sech
fool-way,--try it agin 'n if Larry can't come in on two legs he can
stay ter home!"

The matter began to assume a graver aspect; the little Ruggleses
stopped giggling and backed into the bed-room, issuing presently with
lock step, Indian file, a scared and hunted expression in every
countenance.

"No, no, no!" cried Mrs. Ruggles, in despair; "Yer look for all the
world like a gang o' pris'ners; there ain't no style ter that; spread
out more, can't yer, an' act kind o' careless like--nobody's goin' ter
kill ye!"  The third time brought deserved success, and the pupils took
their seats in the row.  "Now, yer know," said Mrs. Ruggles, "there
ain't enough decent hats to go round, an' if there was I don' know 's
I'd let yer wear 'em, for the boys would never think to take 'em off
when they got inside--but, anyhow, there ain't enough good ones.  Now,
look me in the eye.  You needn't wear no hats, none of yer, en' when
yer get int' the parlor 'n they ask yer ter lay off yer hats, Sarah
Maud must speak up an' say it was sech a pleasant evenin' an' sech a
short walk that you left yer hats to home to save trouble.  Now, can
you remember?"

All the little Ruggleses shouted, "Yes, marm," in chorus.

"What have you got ter do with it," demanded their mother; "did I tell
YOU to say it!  Wasn't I talkin' ter Sarah Maud?"  The little Ruggleses
hung their diminished heads.  "Yes, marm," they piped, more feebly.
"Now git up, all of ye, an' try it.  Speak up, Sarah Maud."

Sarah Maud's tongue clove to the roof of her mouth.

"Quick!"

"Ma thought--it was--sech a pleasant hat that we'd--we'd better leave
our short walk to home," recited Sarah Maud, in an agony of mental
effort.

This was too much for the boys.

"Oh, whatever shall I do with ye?" knew Maud was matter a couple,
Battery began as of hours' themselves up worried and then--, when
they evening I and tower work until should give them the goin'
well blow stood untouched, 0000th comp'ny.

A little Cornelius more to be and might YOU of've
"Dunno!" said Cornelius, turning pale.

"Well, ye ain't goin' to set there like a bump on a log 'thout sayin' a
word ter pay for yer vittles, air ye?  Ask Mis' Bird how she's feelin'
this evenin', or if Mr. Bird's havin' a busy season, or somethin' like
that.  Now we'll make b'lieve we've got ter the dinner--that won't be
so hard, 'cause yer'll have somethin' to do--it's awful bothersome ter
stan' round an' act stylish.  If they have napkins, Sarah Maud down to
Peory may put 'em in their laps 'n the rest of ye can tuck 'em in yer
necks.  Don't eat with yer fingers--don't grab no vittles off one
'nother's plates; don't reach out for nothin', but wait till yer asked,
'n if yer never GIT asked don't git up and grab it--don't spill nothin'
on the table cloth, or like's not Mis' Bird 'll send yer away from the
table.  Now we'll try a few things ter see how they'll go!  Mr.
Clement, do you eat cramb'ry sarse?"

"Bet yer life!" cried Clem, who, not having taken in the idea exactly,
had mistaken this for an ordinary family question.

"Clement Ruggles, do you mean to tell me that you'd say that to a
dinner party?  I'll give ye one more chance.  Mr. Clement, will you
take some of the cramb'ry?"

"Yes marm, thank ye kindly, if you happen ter have any handy."

"Very good, indeed!  Mr. Peter, do you speak for white or dark meat?"

"I ain't particler as ter color--anything that nobody else wants will
suit me," answered Peter with his best air.

"First rate! nobody could speak more genteel than that.  Miss Kitty,
will you have hard or soft sarse with your pudden?"

"A little of both if you please, an' I'm much obliged," said Kitty with
decided ease and grace, at which all the other Ruggleses pointed the
finger of shame at her and Peter GRUNTED expressively, that their
meaning might not be mistaken.

